---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Making Friends with Failure in STS

### Jessamy Perriam

I often tell a story to my Masters of Science students in a course
called ‘Navigating Complexity’ about a research experience I had early
in my PhD studies. It’s one part failure narrative, one part lesson in
keeping boundaries in science and technology studies (STS), and another
part entertaining story.

A group of us were doing a research project about selfie sticks (forgive
us on the subject matter, it was 2014) with a mixed methods approach.
One person in the group did an ethnography in a museum, another did a
Twitter scrape of \#selfiestick, and I did a visual analysis of
Instagram images with the hashtag \#selfiestick and later a breaching
experiment at an art gallery where the object had been banned. We were
using these methods to look for accounts of the selfie stick being
considered disruptive in public places. In some respects, the research
was a failure. The museum ethnography didn’t show anyone being offended
at the selfie stick—in fact, its use was encouraged on the day our
researcher visited. The co-hashtag analysis wasn’t useful from an STS
perspective; we had gathered the data from the Christmas/New Year
period, which meant a lot of people had received selfie sticks as gifts
and were tweeting photos along with hashtags^⁠^ such as \#love,
\#family, \#NYE, and \#xmas.[^06Jessamy_1]

‘Love?!’ remarked one of the researchers, ‘we can’t do anything useful
with love in STS!’

I tell that story to my students and emphasize the punchline to make the
distinction between doing an STS-style controversy mapping, with the
focus on objects and actors, and a cultural or media studies project,
where an analysis could have been made of the tweets and their
co-hashtags. I also follow up by reassuring students that within the
bounds of the course where they are required to use digital methods to
visualize and analyze a research question of their own choosing, that
failure does not lie in the data collection activities itself.

For many students, it is the first time they have done research design
with digital methods from a feminist STS standpoint. I make a point that
digital methods projects such as these are inherently inductive. While
the researcher can control the search queries they make to the
application programming interface (API)^⁠^[^06Jessamy_2], they are largely at the
mercy of the what the API serves up based on those queries and what any
given user is tweeting about on that day with those hashtags. For the
purposes of the students’ projects, failure lies in a lack of working
with the data they have collected to tell a narrative in relation to the
course syllabus, which deals with methods, standpoints, data feminism,
mapping, and analysis, along with the absence of data.

In the data collection and visual analysis of Instagram images tagged
with \#selfiestick, I was looking at the configuration of the images and
specifically asking: what are selfie stick users taking pictures of and
with? I was hoping to find some posts of people being annoyed at selfie
stick users. After analysing more than 10,000 posts, I was somewhat
surprised at what I found. Rather than producing a data visualization, I
had managed to put together a typology of selfie stick posts. But the
original intention of trying to find accounts of the selfie stick being
disruptive or derided? There were only a few posts that backed that up.

In hindsight, it’s clear that this was a failure that lay in the
research formulation. The research question (if there was one at the
time) was as close to being deductive as one can get with qualitative
digital research. There was the assumption that both selfie sticks are
disruptive and that they were disruptive enough for people to post about
them on social media. It was a rookie error; one that I would have
encouraged my current students to avoid. But the error had been made and
happens so often (especially when doing digital methods research)—you go
in looking for accounts of the selfie stick being disruptive and end up
with a typology that includes people using a selfie stick while posing
with their pet.

The final failure in that project has turned into another one of those
research stories that I milk for entertainment value with colleagues and
friends. The breaching experiment was the most amusing research failure
of all. A breaching experiment is a research method used almost
exclusively by ethnomethodologists to try to uncover the reasoning for
taken for granted behaviour. Breaching experiments usually consist of
the researcher breaking a publicly accepted, taken for granted social
norm or rule to deliberately get caught, with the intention of then
asking the person responsible for keeping the rule why the rule exists
in the first place. Some contemporary STS-based examples of breaching
experiments come from Woolgar and Neyland, involving researchers taking
more than 100 millilitres of liquid through airport security to try to
uncover the reasoning for the rule and how it is enforced.[^06Jessamy_3] Breaching
experiments were initially devised by Harold Garfinkel^⁠^, who rather
tellingly made his students do the research work that laid the
foundations for this method.[^06Jessamy_4]

My encounter with breaching experiments led me to purchase a selfie
stick and take it with me on a visit to the National Gallery in London.
The gallery had recently banned the selfie stick. The plan was that I
would get caught using the selfie stick and then ask follow up questions
as to why. In practice, I am a rather introverted person who dislikes
breaking rules, especially in a conspicuous way. Perhaps doing a
breaching experiment was not the research method best suited to my
temperament, so I took my flatmate as moral support.

When we arrived, we found out that many of the National Gallery’s
docents were on strike, so there was a reduced security presence. We
were browsing the galleries and started taking photos using the selfie
stick in front of artworks that piqued our interest. We were initially
timid but became more brazen as we realized none of the docents or
security guards had noticed our deviant behaviour enough to ask us to
stop. By the end of our visit, none of the gallery staff had intervened
in our selfie stick use. The indifference of the gallery staff meant
that the breaching experiment was a failure in terms of uncovering an
institutional explanation for restricting the selfie stick in the space.

However, despite the failure of the breaching experiment, the exercise
was not wasted. It generated a rich, autoethnographic account of selfie
stick use in galleries, particularly in relation to how visitors might
navigate the space differently with selfies in mind. While it didn’t end
up being a breaching experiment, it was also somewhat an instance of the
walkthrough method[^06Jessamy_5], as I had not used a selfie stick before the
breaching experiment. The experience of navigating the gallery was also
an experience of learning how to use the selfie stick.

I tell these stories to also make failure relatable. It happens to many
of us, and yet we are not encouraged to publish about it, so as to
falsely emphasize our infallibility as researchers. Twenty-five years
after Haraway^⁠6^ wrote about the modest witness, we as a research
community still do not acknowledge mess, failure, and conflicting
standpoints in our outputs.[^06Jessamy_6] Only the sanitized, wrinkles-ironed-out
version of research activities and their analysis is worthy to be told
to the broader academic community, or actioned upon by a business or
government.

My PhD almost failed, and it resembles little of the selfie stick
descriptions contained in the last few hundred words. It pivoted to
become a digital ethnography of how mundane failure is demonstrated on
digital and social media.^⁠^[^06Jessamy_7] The failure of the selfie stick still
makes an appearance as a chapter that reflects on methodological
failures of researching disruption. If your entire PhD thesis deals with
how commuters, public institutions, cybersecurity experts, and
researchers talk about failure and breakdown, it takes the sting out of
talking about your own failure. I rarely talk about this failure, but I
own it and its contribution to my formation as a researcher.

But there has also been an urge in recent years to ensure that failure
be generative, as some form of consolation prize for things not going to
plan. Is that a neoliberal way of looking at failure? Everything must
have value squeezed out of it, even our screw ups. As the British artist
David Shrigley (2021)^⁠^ so astutely put on a poster: ‘When life gives
you a lemon/ you must eat the lemon/ all of it /including the skin’.[^06Jessamy_8]
Sometimes we as researchers are in the position of eating the skins of
our research lemons.

So how then to talk about failure in research? How do we work with
failure in such a way that we do not feel shame about it, nor do we feel
urged to capitalize on it? In short: how do we let failure be what it
needs to be within our research?

Some colleagues of mine have run workshops that encourage participants
to ‘talk to texts that they’re struggling to write.’^⁠9^ They consider
the troubling parts of their work in the ‘monster writing’ process, but
in framing these troubles as monsters, the troubles are rendered
addressable. Part of the exercise involves addressing the text and
honestly admitting the struggles that they’re having with it as a form
of moving forward—either to closure or working more on the text with a
renewed understanding of its place in the world:

> What responsibilities does the writing self have toward the written
> creature, the written body, the body of text as it is set lose to roam
> the world? This creature is part self, part other, never at rest; in
> its hybridity and in its undoing of stable boundaries between self and
> other, this text-creature is a monster. How might one learn to live in
> the company of one's text monsters, both while writing them and while
> they roam this world, co-creating it as they go, separate from their
> creator but never fully other?[^06Jessamy_9]

What responsibilities do we have towards our failures in STS research?
How do we think about them not as offcuts of the research, but as a part
of our narrative as researchers? By addressing our failure and
introducing it to others like an old friend, we are able to share it but
not exploit it under the weight of the constant pressure to be
generative.

[^06Jessamy_1]: This co-hashtag scrape on Twitter happened during a time where
    Instagram users could also directly post to Twitter from the
    platform. The two platforms are now less coupled together in this
    way. This had an impact on the types of posts that appeared in our
    scrape.

[^06Jessamy_2]: The application programming interface (API) is the piece of code
    that allows the researcher to ask a platform to gather data. The API
    usually gathers a sample of content, rather than the entirety of
    what has been posted due to large volumes of data.

[^06Jessamy_3]: Steve Woolgar and Daniel Neyland, *Mundane Governance: Ontology
    and Accountability*, 1st edition, Oxford: Oxford University Press,
    2013.

[^06Jessamy_4]: Harold Garfinkel, *Studies in Ethnomethodology*, 1st edition,
    Cambridge, UK: Polity, 1991.

[^06Jessamy_5]: Ben Light, Jean Burgess, and Stefanie Duguay, ‘The Walkthrough
    Method: An Approach to the Study of Apps,’ *New Media & Society* 20.
    3 (1 March 2018): 881–900. https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444816675438.

[^06Jessamy_6]: Donna Haraway,
    Modest₋Witness@Second₋Millennium.FemaleMan₋Meets₋OncoMouse:
    *Feminism and Technoscience*, New York: Routledge, 1997.

[^06Jessamy_7]: Jessamy Perriam, *Theatres of Failure: Digital Demonstrations of
    Disruption in Everyday Life*, PhD diss., Goldsmiths, University of
    London, 2018. http://research.gold.ac.uk/23312/.

[^06Jessamy_8]: David Shrigley, *When Life Gives You A Lemon*, 2021, poster, 80 x
    60 cm.

[^06Jessamy_9]: Line Henriksen, Katrine Meldgaard Kjær, Marie Blønd, Marisa Cohn,
    Baki Cakici, Rachel Douglas‐Jones, Pedro Ferreira, Viktoriya Feshak,
    Simy Kaur Gahoonia, and Sunniva Sandbukt, ‘Writing Bodies and Bodies
    of Text: Thinking Vulnerability through Monsters,’ *Gender, Work &
    Organization* 29. 2 (March 2022), 565.
    https://doi.org/10.1111/gwao.12782.

    # 

    ## Bibliography

    Garfinkel, Harold. *Studies in Ethnomethodology*, 1st edition,
    Cambridge, UK: Polity, 1991.

    Haraway, Donna.
    Modest₋Witness@Second₋Millennium.FemaleMan₋Meets₋OncoMouse:
    *Feminism and Technoscience*, New York: Routledge, 1997.

    Henriksen, Line, Katrine Meldgaard Kjær, Marie Blønd, Marisa Cohn,
    Baki Cakici, Rachel Douglas-Jones, Pedro Ferreira, Viktoriya Feshak,
    Simy Kaur Gahoonia, and Sunniva Sandbukt. ‘Writing Bodies and Bodies
    of Text: Thinking Vulnerability through Monsters,’ *Gender, Work &
    Organization* 29. 2 (March 2022): 561–74.
    https://doi.org/10.1111/gwao.12782.

    Light, Ben, Burgess, Jean, and Duguay, Stefanie. ‘The Walkthrough
    Method: An Approach to the Study of Apps,’ *New Media & Society* 20.
    3 (1 March 2018): 881–900. https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444816675438.

    Perriam, Jessamy. *Theatres of Failure: Digital Demonstrations of
    Disruption in Everyday Life,* PhD diss., Goldsmiths, University of
    London, 2018. http://research.gold.ac.uk/23312/.

    Shrigley, David. *When Life Gives You A Lemon*, 2021, poster, 80 x
    60 cm.

    Woolgar, Steve and Neyland, Daniel. *Mundane Governance: Ontology
    and Accountability*, 1st edition, Oxford: Oxford University Press,
    2013.
