---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Patent Failure, Researcher Failure, Archive Failure: Getting Inventive With the Study of Inventions

### Kat Jungnickel

![](media/image1.png){width="3.7261373578302712in"
height="5.195786307961505in"}

Figure 4.1: Drawings from Sidonie Meißner’s 1893 patent for a ‘Garment
for Lady Cyclists’[^08Kat_1]

> I, SIDONIE MEIßNER of Grosse Brudergasse, Dresden, in the German
> Empire, Spinster, do hereby declare the nature of this invention \[…\]
> to provide for lady cyclists a garment which allows of a convenient
> working of the treadles, serves as a protection against dust and dirt
> and keeps covered the upper part of the leg. The garment terminates at
> bottom in a trouser, the two lower ends of which are drawn in by
> rubber or elastic binding. The garment is buttoned down the front as
> shewn \[sic\] and may have the form of an ordinary coat with trouser
> like extensions which in use are drawn upwards within the body and it
> is drawn in at the waist in the ordinary manner at the upper band.
> Suitable pockets may be provided. 

I start this chapter with drawings and words by Sidonie Meißner, an
inventor living in Germany in 1893. She applied for a patent for a
‘Garment for Lady Cyclists’ at the British Patent Office — with the
assistance of Patent Agents in Chancery Lane, London — on 11^th^ July,
and it was accepted on 23rd September in the same year. It responded
to a cycling craze sweeping Europe in the late nineteenth century. Both
women and men were enthusiastic early adopters of the bicycle, but they
experienced it very differently.[^08Kat_2] Early women cyclists suffered
intense social scrutiny, because like many Victorian sports, cycling was
considered the ‘natural domain of men’.[^08Kat_3] They were pressured to
maintain ‘feminine dignity’ regardless of the activity, and to avoid
looking hot, dishevelled, or dirty.[^08Kat_4]

Yet, cycling was not only a highly public activity but also an intensely
physical one. Long skirts appropriate for walking were largely
incompatible with the moving machinery of the bicycle. In many cases
looking dishevelled was the least of their problems. Materials caught
the wind and blew up, revealing legs, and tangled in wheels and pedals.
Newspapers regularly reported on deaths and disfigurements from cycle
crashes caused by women’s clothing. Unsealed roads were also a reality
which made cycling a dusty and often muddy experience. While wearing
more ‘rational dress’ such as shorter skirts or swapping them entirely
for bloomers or knickerbockers might have been safer and more
comfortable, it exposed the wearer to different dangers. Writing about
the experience of cycling in England in the 1890s, Irene Marshall[^08Kat_5]
explains:

> Caps, stones, road refuse — anything was then flung at the hapless
> woman who dared to reveal the secret that she had two legs. And the
> insults were not confined to the lower classes. Well-dressed people,
> people who would be classed as ladies and gentlemen, frequently
> stopped and made rude remarks.

Yet nothing was going to stop women from cycling once they experienced
the freedom and independence promised by the bicycle. Late Victorian
Britain was an exciting time for new ideas, technologies, and media. The
cycling boom corresponded with patent system reform and opened the
process of claiming an inventive idea to a broader range of inventors.
Along with the many social and sartorial challenges facing women, these
conditions catalysed much inventive activity by and for women. This
chapter focuses on inventions for convertible cycling skirts which
enabled wearers to safely cycle while also concealing evidence of their
athletic activities as and when needed.

Sidonie Meißner’s invention does this and more. From the outside her
‘Garment for Lady Cyclists’ looks like an ordinary long skirt yet it
includes excess fabric shaped into ‘pop out’ leggings concealed under
the lower hem. She explains it’s triple aim; to provide freedom of
movement to cycle, to keep pedalling legs covered, and to protect the
wearer from ‘dust and dirt.’ Her suggestion for ‘suitable pockets’ is
also reflective of independent women’s desire to carry goods and free
their hands. ‘No pocketless people’, asserted a male *New York Times*
writer in 1899, ‘has ever been great since pockets were invented, and
the female sex cannot rival us while it is pocketless.’[^08Kat_6]

I know all these related contextual insights from years of research on
this topic. While Sidonie Mießner’s patent data is valuable and points
to lots of rich topical issues to explore, I’m looking for more. Yet her
patent only provides half a page of text and two intriguing line
drawings. It is tantalisingly brief. And I haven’t been able to access
anything else more directly related to her. As a result, I know very
little about the inventor or what happened to her specific invention.

There are several potential reasons for this.

My initial response is to worry that I had failed as archive researcher.
Did I miss extra data about her life in the archives? Did I overlook a
critical fragment of her life somewhere? Was there a snippet of text or
an image I flicked past that would have led me down new and untravelled
paths? Maybe more is still out there. As researchers, we seek threads
across archives; serendipitous connections, sharp moments of association
when a visual fragment from one archive suddenly slots into place with
text from another. I know this feeling. I have celebrated on my own very
quietly in dusty stacks with joy and relief when something like this
happens. But not here. Not now. Sidonie Mießner’s life eludes me.

Another possibility is that the inventor failed. Perhaps this is all
there is. Was she unsuccessful in securing a future for her patent? Did
her invention fail to leave the patent office records? Did no one see
any potential in it? There is no trace of it being commercialized or
distributed. There was no launch event. There is no evidence that anyone
talked about, made, or wore it. There is nothing about her or her
invention in newspapers, magazines, or periodical archives.

## Data: Too Much, Not Enough

In past projects I conducted ethnography with live people. I visited
them in their homes, climbed onto their rooftops, spent time in their
backyard sheds, went cycling with them, and discussed their
relationships with technology, public space, and each other. Data was
everywhere. All too frequently, issues in research emerge from having
too much of it. [^08Kat_7] Ethnographic texts commonly discuss being
‘overwhelmed’, ‘unnerved’, and ‘daunted’ by data. Learning how to make
sense and order it is much harder. Archival analysis can feel similar,
in many circumstances. For example in *Dust*, Carolyn Steedman writes at
length about the overwhelming feeling of dealing with a tsunami of stuff
people have left behind:

> Archive fever comes on at night, long after the archive has shut for
> the day…. Everything. Not a purchase made, not a thing acquired that
> is not noted and recorded. You think: I could get to hate these people
> and, I can never do these people justice, and, finally: I shall never
> get it done \[…\] Your anxiety is that you will not finish, that there
> will be something left unread, unnoted, untranscribed \[…\] Your craft
> is to conjure a social system from a nutmeg grater.[^08Kat_8]

But, what do we do with a nutmeg grater and very little nutmeg?

I felt adrift and mildly panicked the first time this happened. The
feeling was amplified as I had just spent a giddy few days finding many
exciting connections across archives about another inventor. Now, I had
this. Nothing. Zilch. Sidonie Mießner was nowhere to be found. What
would I do if I couldn’t find anything about her or her invention? What
kind of a patent researcher was I? What could I do in this research dead
end? What would I write about?

But, maybe it wasn’t just Sidonie Meißner’s or my fault.

Another site of failure lies with archives themselves. Not everything is
recorded about everyone. Or even if they are, over time archival data
can get lost, ignored or systematically erased.

Sidonie Mießner may have filed her patent in Britain, but she resided in
Germany. Lots of archival data went missing or was destroyed in wartime.
Apparently, ‘World War II resulted in the greatest loss and displacement
of cultural treasures, books, and archives in history.’[^08Kat_9] While her
name seems distinct, and generates several promising genealogical
results, nothing can be certain. This is partly because she
self-identifies as a spinster. Even though their last names change, it
is sometimes easier to find women if they are married (as there are more
records about the men in their lives).[^08Kat_10] Her patent unfortunately
doesn’t provide any information about her vocation (either she didn’t
have one or it wasn’t considered important, as was the case for much
women’s documentation in archives).

Many inventions, especially those of women, were renamed when they were
commercialized, which makes them even harder to trace. Being a woman
made it even harder to succeed in business at the time (as she most
likely lacked socio-political capital, networks, and funds). Even worse,
being a spinster was viewed as a failure by parts of society. For some
‘the state of singleness for women was a most “unfortunate”
condition.’[^08Kat_11]

## Archives: Biased, Messy, and Troublesome

Archives always tell certain stories about specific people, places, and
times. Much like maps, archives are powerful devices that simultaneously
convey and conceal knowledge, are shaped by political norms and beliefs,
and predominantly assembled by a victor with an explicit purpose in
mind. Archives ‘are not innocent sites of storage’ but rather ‘already
texts shaped according to interests and needs of certain groups’.[^08Kat_12]
Queer and feminist archivists and historians have long drawn attention
to and questioned the politics that shape collections and encourage
readers to see not only what is present but also what is absent.

As technofeminist Ruth Schwartz-Cowan reminds, ‘the absence of a female
perspective in the available histories of technology was a function of
the historians who write them and not of the historical reality.’[^08Kat_13]
For Anne Stoler, a feminist turn in the archives involves a ‘move from
archive as source *to* archive as subject.’[^08Kat_14] She talks about
‘archiving as a process’ rather than ‘archives as things.’[^08Kat_15] This
work reorients the reading of the past as a way to critique the
political and colonial contexts of knowledge and knowledge makers. The
lack of data about women is especially troublesome. Women tend to go
unrecorded in official accounts, especially technological and cycling
histories. Patents are valuable in this context as they ‘present a
valuable perspective on female inventive activity and market
participation in an era when marriage meant the virtual “invisibility”
of married women in terms of objective data.’[^08Kat_16]

None of this means that Sidonie Mießner didn’t exist, of course, or that
her patent wasn’t successful or that her invention wasn’t made, worn,
and enjoyed by early women cyclists. The task becomes how to reconstruct
her life and invention when there are few traces in the archives.

What to do with flawed archival data? Or in this case, the lack of
flawed archival data?

## Experimental Approaches to Archival Research

Inspiration can be found in many creative and experimental approaches to
archive research. Writing about queer filmmaker Cheryl Dunye’s practice,
Julia Bryan-Wilson explains how ‘Dunye has consistently explored the
affective potency that lies within historical records — and the gaps in
those records — to explore how fictional archives might be necessary for
queer lives in the present as well as for imagined futures’.[^08Kat_17]
Feminist archivists Nydia Swaby and Chandra Frank take a different
sensory approach: ‘We are invested in exploring the experimental as a
means to read, experience, feel and touch archives’ and ‘as an
imaginary, in which we deliberately make space for play, refusal and
artistic renderings of archives and their materiality’.[^08Kat_18] They also
‘propose experimentation as a form of dwelling and lingering in the
archive to subvert linear notions of time and place’.[^08Kat_19]

Even more directly, African-American scholar Saidiya Hartman creatively
challenges the authority of historical data that ‘dictates what can be
said about the past and kinds of stories that can be told about the
persons catalogues, embalmed, and sealed away in a box of files and
folios’.[^08Kat_20] Her powerful work reads ‘against the grain, disturbing and
breaking open the stories’ which requires her ‘to speculate, listen
intently, read between the lines, attend to the disorder and mess of the
archive, and to honor the silence.’[^08Kat_21]

Although diverse, these writers collectively take political positions in
their work by identifying and rendering visible the ‘telling blanks and
perversely wilful holes’ in archives.[^08Kat_22] Guided by this inspiring
interdisciplinary work, failures and gaps in archives can be seen as
invitations to find, piece together, and convey new stories or alternate
perspectives on existing ones. A dead end in the archives is not
terrible. It does not mark the end of a project. Rather, as I am
learning, there are many ways of responding to it. In the case of
Sidonie Mießner’s patent, it enabled me to get inventive with the study
of invention. As Celia Lury and Nina Wakeford have argued, ‘Inventive
methods are ways to introduce answerability into a problem \[…\] if
methods are to be inventive, they should not leave that problem
untouched’.[^08Kat_23]

My practice involves the use of what I term ‘speculative sewing’,
whereby I ‘stitch data, theory and fabric into inventions described in
patents and analyse them as three-dimensional arguments’.[^08Kat_24] The lack
of surviving data about the invention and/or the invention itself can be
partially rectified by remaking it. The patent after all is a
step-by-step series of instructions for future users to replicate an
inventor’s idea. For my research team, the process of researching,
reconstructing, and re-imagining lesser known technoscience stories into
material forms offers ways to spend time with the inventor, interview
her about her practice, make mistakes, take tangents, and reflect on the
process.

This practice reveals the complexities of the invention often hidden in
(brief) texts. Physically getting up close to and into the research and
reflecting on the intimacy of making and wearing other people’s clothes
adds new and different textures and layers to the analysis. This
approach to failure can be seen as a political act of visibility. The
materiality of a convertible cycling skirt marks a firm counter argument
to the invisibility of the inventor in other forms of official and
formal records.

## Getting Inventive with Failure

This chapter started with questions about failure. I asked who or what
was central to the problem of not finding data about the inventor
Sidonie Mießner’s life and her invention. Research rarely takes us in
the direction we initially expect. And even, as mapped out above, when
we start to approach seemingly stressful dead ends there are sometimes
inventive ways out. Reflecting on the work of scholars who approach
failure in archives in creative and experimental ways encourages us to
read ‘against the grain’.[^08Kat_25]As Swaby and Frank remind us, ‘the archive
is as much a site of loss as of abundance’.[^08Kat_26]

## Bibliography

‘Bicycling News and Sport and Play. Lines for Ladies by Marguerite’,
quoting from ‘The Compromises of Cycling’ in *Hearth and Home*, 28 May
1895, 34.

Bryan-Wilson, Julia and Dunye, Cheryl. ‘Imaginary Archives: A Dialogue’,
*Art Journal* 72.2 (2013): 82-89.

Fetterman, David, M. *Ethnography: Step by Step*. 3rd edition, Applied
Social Research Methods Series 17, London: Sage, 2010.

Hammersley, Martin, and Atkinson, Pau. *Ethnography: Principles in
Practice*, 3rd edition, London and New York: Routledge, 2007.

Hargreaves, Jennifer. *Sporting Females: Critical Issues in the History
and Sociology of Women’s Sports,* London and New York: Routledge, 1994.

Hartman, Saidiya. *Wayward Lives, Beautiful Experiments: Intimate
Histories of Riotous Black Girls, Troublesome Women and Queer Radicals*,
London: Serpent’s Tail, 2021.

­­­\_\_\_\_. *Lose Your Mother: A Journey Along the Atlantic Slave
Route*, London: Serpent’s Tail, 2007, 17.

Holmes, Katie. ‘‘Spinsters Indispensable’: Feminists, Single Women and
the Critique of Marriage, 1890-1920,’ *Australian Historical Studies*,
29.100: 68-90.

Jungnickel, Kat. ‘Speculative Sewing: Researching, Reconstructing And
Re-Imagining Clothing Inventions As Wearable Technoscience’, *Social
Studies of Science*, online first 16 Aug 2022,
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/03063127221119213.

\_\_\_\_. *Bikes and Bloomers: Victorian Women Inventors And Their
Extra-Ordinary Cyclewear*, London: Goldsmiths Press, 2018.

Kennedy Grimstead, Patricia. ‘Spoils of War Returned’, *Prologue
Magazine*, 34. 2 (2002),
https://www.archives.gov/publications/prologue/2002/spring/spoils-of-war-1.

Khan, Zorina B. ‘Married Women’s Property Laws and Female Commercial
Activity: Evidence From United States Patent Records, 1790-1895’, *The
Journal of Economic History* 56.2 (1996): 356—388, 365-6.

Lury, Celia and Wakeford, Nina (eds). *Inventive Methods: The Happening
of the Social*, London and New York: Routledge, 2012.

Marshall, Irene. *The Rational Dress Gazette, Organ of the Rational
Dress* *League* - *Correspondence*, No. 10, July 1899, 40.

Meißner, Sidonie. *Patent GB189313442A ‘Garment for Lady Cyclists’*, 23
September 1897, [www.epo.org](http://www.epo.org).

*The New York Times*, ‘World’s Use of Pockets,’ 28 August 1899.

Pollock, Griselda. ‘Trouble in the Archives’, *Women’s Art Magazine* 54
(1993): 10-13.

Schwartz-Cowan, Ruth. *A Social History of American Technology*, Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press, 2007.

Steed, Caroline. ‘Something She Called Fever: Michelet, Derrida and
Dust’, *The American Historical Review*, 106.4 (2001): 1159-1180.

Stoler, Kate. ‘Colonial Archives and the Arts of Governance’, *Archival
Science* 2 (2002): 87-109.

Swaby, Nydia A and Frank, Chandra. ‘Archival Experiments, Notes and
(dis)Orientations,’ *Feminist Review* 125 (2020): 4-16.

[^08Kat_1]: Sidonie Meißner, *Patent GB189313442A ‘Garment for Lady
    Cyclists*’, 23 September 1897, [www.epo.org](http://www.epo.org).

[^08Kat_2]: For more discussion in these issues see Kat Jungnickel, *Bikes and
    Bloomers: Victorian Women Inventors And Their Extra-Ordinary
    Cyclewear*, London: Goldsmiths Press, 2018.

[^08Kat_3]: Jennifer Hargreaves, *Sporting Females: Critical Issues in the
    History and Sociology of Women’s* Sports, London and New York:
    Routledge, 1994, 43.

[^08Kat_4]: ‘Bicycling News and Sport and Play. Lines for Ladies by
    Marguerite’, quoting from ‘The Compromises of Cycling’ in *Hearth
    and Home*, 28 May 1895, 34.

[^08Kat_5]: Irene Marshall. *The Rational Dress Gazette, Organ of the Rational
    Dress* *League* – *Correspondence*, No. 10, July 1899, 40.

[^08Kat_6]: *The New York Times,* ‘World’s Use of Pockets,’ 28 August 1899, 7.

[^08Kat_7]: See for example Martin, Hammersley and Paul Atkinson,
    *Ethnography: Principles in Practice*, 3^rd^ edition, Oxon:
    Routledge, 2007; David, M. Fetterman, *Ethnography: Step by Step*.
    3^rd^ edition, Applied Social Research Methods Series 17, London:
    Sage, 2010.

[^08Kat_8]: Caroline Steed, ‘Something She Called Fever: Michelet, Derrida and
    Dust’, *The American Historical Review*, 106.4 (2001): 1159-1180,
    1164-5

[^08Kat_9]: Patricia Kennedy Grimstead, ‘Spoils of War Returned’, *Prologue
    Magazine*, 34. 2 (2002),
    https://www.archives.gov/publications/prologue/2002/spring/spoils-of-war-1.

[^08Kat_10]: For example, ancestry records provide lots of accounts of Sidone
    Meißners. A Sidonie Elise Mießner was born 29 Feb 1868 in Erfurt,
    Germany. This would make her quite young, 21 years old, at the time
    of her patent. However, she was married to Emile Richard Fuhrman.
    Another Sidonie was born 1855 in Dresden (making her 42 in 1897).
    She was also married to a Hugo Roßner.

[^08Kat_11]: Katie Holmes, ‘‘Spinsters Indispensable’: Feminists, Single Women
    and the Critique of Marriage, 1890-1920,’ *Australian Historical
    Studies*, 29.100: 68-90, 68.

[^08Kat_12]: Griselda Pollock, ‘Trouble in the Archives’, *Women’s Art
    Magazine* 54 (1993): 10-13, 12.

[^08Kat_13]: Ruth Schwartz-Cowan, *A Social History of American Technology*,
    Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2007, 120.

[^08Kat_14]: Kate Stoler, ‘Colonial Archives and the Arts of Governance’,
    *Archival Science* 2 (2002): 87-109, 93

[^08Kat_15]: Stoler, ‘Colonial Archives’, 87.

[^08Kat_16]: Zorina B. Khan, ‘Married Women’s Property Laws and Female
    Commercial Activity: Evidence From United States Patent Records,
    1790-1895’, *The Journal of Economic History* 56.2 (1996): 356—388,
    365-6.

[^08Kat_17]: Julia Bryan-Wilson and Cheryl Dunye, ‘Imaginary Archives: A
    Dialogue’, *Art Journal*, 72.2 (2013): 82-89, 83

[^08Kat_18]: Nydia A Swaby and Chandra Frank, ‘Archival Experiments, Notes and
    (dis)Orientations,’ *Feminist Review* 125 (2020): 4-16, 4.

[^08Kat_19]: Swaby and Frank, ‘Archival Experiments’.

[^08Kat_20]: Saidiya Hartman, *Lose Your Mother: A Journey Along the Atlantic
    Slave Route*, London: Serpent’s Tail, 2007, 17.

[^08Kat_21]: Saidiya Hartman, *Wayward Lives, Beautiful Experiments: Intimate
    Histories of Riotous Black Girls, Troublesome Women and Queer
    Radicals*, London: Serpents Tail, 2021, 34.

[^08Kat_22]: Bryan-Wilson and Dunye, ‘Imaginary Archives’, 82.

[^08Kat_23]: Celia Lury and Nina Wakeford (eds), *Inventive Methods: The
    Happening of the Social*, London and New York: Routledge, 2012, 3.

[^08Kat_24]: Kat Jungnickel, ‘Speculative Sewing: Researching, Reconstructing
    And Re-Imagining Clothing Inventions As Wearable Technoscience’,
    *Social Studies of Science*, online first 16 Aug 2022,
    https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/03063127221119213.

[^08Kat_25]: Hartman, *Wayward Lives,* 34.

[^08Kat_26]: Swaby and Frank, ‘Archival Experiments’, 11.
