---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Failure as Reflexive Method to Think Otherwise

# 

### Annette N. Markham

### 

I fail. I failed. I have failed.

It failed. It is a failure.

I am a failure.

\#FAIL

Failure. The term gets used all the time, in both scientific communities
and everyday conversations. It means very different things to different
people, once you start to unpack the use of the term in its specific
context, or listen to how people describe how they define failure. This
chapter takes as its departure point the colloquial definition of
‘failure’ when used in everyday conversations among researchers, like
social science and humanities doctoral students I have mentored over the
years, as they talk about what did or didn’t work in the practical and
logistical accomplishment of their scientific research.

While the negative valence of failure is resisted in contemporary
critiques, such as the work of Jack Halberstam in the *Queer Art of
Failure*, failure in the everyday sense is still considered something to
avoid, overcome, or obscure.[^09Annette_1] In more than 30 years of mentoring
early career researchers, I have come to realize labelling one’s own
work a failure can cause a researcher to pull up short, come to a full
stop, and turn away from rather than toward these critical junctures. In
this piece, I present three heuristic principles for rethinking what
failure actually constitutes in the course of inquiry, to build the
conceptual notion that failure is nothing more or less than an outcome
of an experiment or action. This is an effort to recast ‘failure’ as
merely a critical juncture, an essential core process of sensemaking. I
have used these heuristics in my own teaching to help build a mindset
and methodological vocabulary as a practical guide for especially those
researchers who want to resist or work around the debilitating
vocabularies of failure.

In popular culture, business, career, and relationship advice books, the
term ‘failure’ is used to describe something bad, wrong, not working as
expected, intended outcomes, or lack of success. ‘Success’ is a state
typically achieved by attaining money, fame, love or at least a stable
relationship. Following the typical — and very Western — hierarchy of
needs proposed by Abraham Maslow, the pinnacle of this success story
would be ‘self-actualization.’ All of these forms of success are
presumed to be achievable through — and the result of — motivation +
effort. For example, in business, I’m likely to be ‘a failure’ if I (a)
am not seeking success or (b) have not succeeded. Therefore, if a person
is a failure, that person has not tried hard enough.

Of course, there have been many efforts in past decades to flip failure
into a concept with a positive valence. In the 2013 book *Fail Fast,
Fail Often*, authors John Babineaux and Ryan Krumboltz insist that
failure is a good thing, something we should embrace.[^09Annette_2] But as one
reads deeper in this or other popular texts (like business blogger Megan
McArdle’s 2014 book, *The Upside of Down*[^09Annette_3]), one will learn that
failure is not good in itself, but is valuable because it is a point or
moment of identification that you should change something, or that
you’re enroute to getting past failure in the ongoing progression toward
success.

Failure, in this pop culture world of blog and book advice for business,
innovation, creativity, or relationships, is portrayed as natural and
normal, something to accept and embrace. But this is not because failure
is a place to stay or an acceptable way of being. Rather, failure
becomes something to overcome in the ambition to achieve the state of
non-failure. *Fail Fast, Fail Often* is littered with excellent examples
of famous people or well-established companies following what they
describe as a natural linear progress toward achievement:

> Since success is usually preceded by bumbling starts and botched
> efforts, you can think about anything you would like to succeed at in
> terms of how you must first be bad at it. You can put it in this form:
> If I want to succeed at \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, I must first be bad at
> \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.[^09Annette_4]

Alexander Clark and Bailey Sousa, Canadian social scientists and
qualitative methodologists who have written various pieces on failure in
academia[^09Annette_5] resist this sort of ‘failure is part of a linear
progression toward success’ logic. They suggest failure is not something
to get beyond. Instead, it is an inherent part of research. Yet even as
much as the concept of failure is lifted up as a good thing, and
elaborated in refreshingly nuanced ways, their conceptualization and use
of the term still reinforces a negative valence. In their call for
papers on failure, Sousa and Clark define research failures as
‘situations or events of consequence in which your choices, presence, or
influence contributed conceivably to an adverse or undesirable research
process or outcomes’.[^09Annette_6] While expanding the notion of failure as
inevitable and natural, these authors still situate these moments as
wrong and unwanted. They suggest, in a different article published for
*The Guardian,* that academics should learn to fail better, so the
negative outcomes are minimized: ‘When failure happens, be grateful that
it occurred but was not bigger, more damaging or more complex’. [^09Annette_7]

The storyline in the self-help sections of bookstores is not markedly
different from the typical academic environment where early career
scholars are socialized into what it means to do good research,
unfortunately. Failure remains the opposite of success. Within this
framing, while failure is something we might accept, it is still bad or
wrong, implying that if one were only a better researcher, it wouldn’t
have happened. The discursive impact of this negative valence can be
internalized over time from simply an account of what happened (‘It
failed’) to an attribute of a person (‘I’m a failure’).

It is no surprise to me that across academic research environments,
especially in fields that are continuously criticized for being less
scientifically rigorous than the hard sciences (i.e. the humanities or
social sciences), failure is almost always cast as something to avoid,
and when something fails or is deemed a failure, it is likely hidden
behind the cleaned-up explanation of one’s practices in a written
report. Despite the many philosophical and critical discussions to the
contrary, everyday discourses around failure remain strongly negative
and fall into the ‘blameworthy’ end of a spectrum of causes, rather than
‘praiseworthy,’ according to Harvard Business School professor Amy
Edmondson. In her piece exploring the misguided beliefs about failure,
she explains:

> When I ask executives to consider this spectrum and then to estimate
> how many of the failures in their organizations are truly blameworthy,
> their answers are usually in single digits—perhaps 2% to 5%. But when
> I ask how many are treated as blameworthy, they say (after a pause or
> a laugh) 70% to 90%.[^09Annette_8]

This attitude among my own doctoral students is certainly exacerbated by
the persistent injunction of academic institutions to conduct research
with the goal of success, a goal that has been heavily scaffolded by the
classic scientific model and driven by the models of an ideology that
science should be in a continuous state of progress.

What happens when we simply define failure as an ‘outcome’ and then
accommodate failure as a common type of outcome, an inherent and
necessary part of inquiry practices, creating critical junctures where
we might pause, reflect, and possibly think otherwise? Especially in
research models involving emergent or open-ended practices of engagement
in social contexts or working with human-generated data, the researcher
is not a passive observer of processes or a neutral agent, but the
primary filter through which cultural and material data passes to be
interpreted. Within this idea, what is the value or role of inquiry
processes that take an unexpected turn, or tools that don’t operate as
expected? If we take failure out of the realm of something to avoid, and
detach failure from a negative personal attribute, how can it function
as a more positive part of discovery and sensemaking?

## Rethinking Failure: A Model for Using Failure as Part of Reflexive Practice

In developing models that embrace failure as useful and natural, the
humanities or social science researcher can take a cue from the hard
sciences, particularly those fields where experimentation is a standard
practice, such as chemistry, design, or engineering. Here, failure is
common and expected. In engineering, for example, failure is
traditionally an attribute given to processes or mechanisms that don’t
operate as expected, or stop operating as expected, as in ‘the
termination of the ability of an item to perform a required
function’.[^09Annette_9]

In designing things for use-in-the-world, it is necessary to test
various aspects of efficacy by trying to get to the failure state. Here,
failure has high information value for further development. It’s a form
of what engineers or designers call ‘stress testing,’ whereby the
researcher can push a system or structure to the breaking point in an
accelerated manner to ‘identify non-intuitive failures that would
normally require months or years in the field to identify’.[^09Annette_10] In
laboratory or bench research like chemistry, failure happens so much
it’s hardly the best explanation for what’s occurring. When one notices
how much failure is happening, cognitive scientist Ann-Sophie Barwich
notes, one might wonder how science makes any advances at all. But on
the contrary, she suggests, science is successful precisely because of
these failures.[^09Annette_11]

As Barwich explains, science ‘must fail to achieve an important job it
sets out to do: discovery. For scientific research to exceed our initial
modelling assumptions and to continuously supersede our ever-adjusting
experimental limits, things have to go wrong’.[^09Annette_12] Failure is
information that can be used to disrupt the taken for granted strategies
and models. There is strong heuristic value in failure.[^09Annette_13]

Taking a cue from authors seeking to build failure more positively into
academic research practices, I use this opportunity to outline a model
where outcomes discarded or dismissed as ‘failures’ can be put back into
the stacks of usable moments and materials in a project to prompt
reflexivity about the levels of fit between research questions and
research design, the role of the researcher, assumptions about
participants, and assumptions about how one’s tools are working.
Inserting failure repeatedly in the process is to ask for opportunities
to think otherwise.

The point I’d like to make here is that we can go some steps beyond the
idea that failure is necessary, normal, or essential, as authors like
Babineaux and Krumboltz, Clark and Sousa, and Barwich have stressed in
their various works, respectively, and to insist that failure is central
to any sensemaking. As a central component, whatever we might label as
‘failure’ during the process of inquiry should be included and
highlighted more deliberately in models for social research design. This
discursive reframing is also an effort to correct the imbalance caused
by the persistent negative framing that occurs when something is
labelled as a failure.

Building from the more abstract manifesto
of Sousa and Clark[^09Annette_14], the three principles below seek to build a
methodological vocabulary and heuristic as a guide for researchers,
especially those who seek to resist the negative valence of failure or
consider how they can use these moments more fruitfully and reflexively
in their own practice. Notably, the three principles below don’t outline
methods, or explicate instances of failure, but describe some
epistemologically-driven, generative questions that emerge at various
points throughout a study.

![](media/image1.png){width="3.0998479877515313in"
height="2.2730719597550304in"}

Figure 5.1: The iterative inquiry spiral. Source: Annette Markham. Used
with permission.



## Failures as Outcomes: Identifying Critical Junctures in Iterative Spirals of Inquiry

Based on a previous model of reflexive practice that emphasizes inquiry
as iterative spirals,[^09Annette_15],[^09Annette_16] any decision that leads to action
constitutes a critical juncture where one ventures into experimental
territory, a sort of venturing forth into the unknown to see what
happens. The outcome of this experiment can be considered another
critical juncture where we can examine what happened and explore where
to go next. These continual junctures or turning points are encountered
again and again as one returns repeatedly to interrogate the research,
in all stages and processes. This idea is depicted in Figure 4.1.

At each of these critical junctures, one might invoke Donna Haraway’s
practice of speculative fabulation[^09Annette_17] to ask a series of ‘what if’
questions. This practice of examining the moment as a temporal
possibility invites speculation along a number of different lines. One
can explore ‘What if it had been otherwise?’ or ‘Why did this happen
versus that?’ Prompts like these enable reflections about what is
happening, or what just happened, or what might have happened otherwise.
This sort of check-in is not with the intent to verify that the process
is valid, but to acknowledge that the process of inquiry is inherently a
matter of choices that have consequences, and there are innumerable
other choices that could be or could have been made, which would lead to
alternate consequences.

Continuing with the inspiration of Haraway’s later discussion of string
figures,[^09Annette_18] discovery comes into and out of view iteratively. By
focusing on these moments with some detailed ‘what if’ questions, the
researcher can find gaps or absences. This is part of what Haraway means
by her concept of ‘staying with the trouble’.[^09Annette_19] These in turn might
highlight certain other ‘failure points,’ which can in turn help us
think about shifting the lens or direction of gaze or sensemaking
practice slightly to get a better (more productive, more ethical, more
daring, more meaningful) angle.

Alternately, this can be a moment to pause, slow down, and reflect. By
allowing the process, event, or moment to breathe more fully, one can
gain a renewed sense of priorities, or maybe discover some limitations,
turning points, or blockages in the current way of going about things.
Or, this sort of critical interrogation might also reveal rich
possibilities and new potentialities, making room for new directions of
fruitful inquiry or even inviting more radical transformations of the
core goals or audiences for the project.

The process of reflection occurs repeatedly, but at different levels.
This may not always be comfortable and is, in a practical sense, time
consuming. Yet once we start to pay attention to these critical
junctures, we might realize that the label of failure is somewhat
arbitrary and certainly capricious. In some circumstances, the outcome
will be labelled ‘failure,’ whereas in other cases, it will simply be
labelled ‘a turning point’, or maybe an event that shifted one’s
practice.

## Failure as Information: Locating Movement, Positionality, and Worldviews

As we move — through the world, through field sites, through different
experiments, through research projects — we are positioning and
repositioning ourselves to various sites of meaning. Whether or not we
notice, our habitual and trained modalities of attention are generating
layers and layers of data — or perhaps more appropriately put, stimuli
that becomes data when we use it as information to interpret situations
or make meaning. Each of our movements, actions, or swings of attention
create a slightly different lens or perspective. These are tacit tools
for observation, engagement, and analysis embedded in our everyday
trained sensibilities.

What does this have to do with ‘failure’? Well, when nothing goes wrong,
so to speak, we likely never notice the methodological function of the
various lenses emerging from our attention, yet they are in continual
operation. They become visible only when we stumble, glitch, or
otherwise do something that brings our working assumptions or tacit ways
of knowing to the surface. Then, they become something to scrutinize. In
this way, anything labelled as ‘failure’ can be reflexively considered
as reflections or products of particular modes of attention, ways of
working, or other operationalizations of our ontologies and
epistemologies.

No matter how much we might think we comprehend our own worldview or
stance, critically interrogating outcomes or end results — whether we
call these ‘failures’ or not — can function as a form of identifying and
then scrutinizing the obvious methods as well as the more tacit
practices or ways of knowing that were operating that might have
influenced these outcomes. Reverse engineering is one way of unpacking
various components of end results or products; each component in turn
reveals or recreates micro-moments of processes that could have led to
the outcome. In connecting to the idea of one’s movements or attention
as tools of methods, one is trying to connect one’s trained practice to
one’s movements (and habitual actions of attention) more visibly, which
gives reflexive focus on how one’s position is influencing decisions
that may have led to this versus that outcome. This scrutiny may change
one’s perspective, technique, or habit of attention, as is often the
case when this scrutiny is used in a chemistry lab to tweak an
experiment’s protocol. But it also might simply generate more
reflexively oriented information. This principle of conceptualizing
failure as information leaps over the simplification that failure is
‘wrong’ and transforms it into a functional and ever-present component
of reflexive practice.

## Failure as Indicators: Interrogating Stakeholders and Power

In most situations of scientific or artistic endeavour, individual
practices in the lab, field, or studio don’t emerge tabula rasa, but
operate within larger communities of practice, disciplinary or
historical traditions, and systems of cultural and conceptual
frameworks. What and whose priorities are valued or devalued when the
label of failure is applied? The most powerful influences on our
practices are indirect, when norms are embedded in infrastructures, or
when decisions are disconnected from the person through neutralizing
phrases like ‘that’s just how it’s done’ or ‘in this field, we use X
tools.’ Sure, we might assess a ‘failed’ project or method through our
own careful determination, but in many circumstances, the decision to
describe something as a failure is externally prescribed, by which I
mean we’ve applied a label because we are using external prescriptive
and normative advice to inform the categorization of something as
‘failed’ or ‘a failure’. Something (a procedure, an outcome, an
encounter, an engagement) does not meet an external expectation.

The question this leads to a question raised in many ways throughout
this volume: where does that expectation come from and what does this
expectation prioritize? Success? Functionality? Adherence to a norm?
Quality? Reflecting on the underpinnings of the expectation reveals
layers of norms, structures, and rules. Here, one can also identify and
scrutinize some of the stakeholders, human and nonhuman influences on
the foundations of our academic approaches. So, when something ‘fails,’
there are troubling but important rabbit holes to travel down, for at
least two reasons. First, this interrogation opens up multiple string
figures[^09Annette_20] of potential dynamics, relationships, or socio-political
structures influencing the shape and conduct of one’s choices of
methodological tools or practice overall. Second, and far more poignant,
it can be an act of resistance against personal and future potential
damage.

The label of ‘failure’ or ‘failing’ can damage the state and progress of
one’s project, not because it is ‘correcting’ or ‘assessing’ but because
it immediately denies and negates, potentially stalling the important
experimentation and invention fundamental to discovery. That’s one level
of damage. The personal and professional impact of ‘failure’ can also be
quite striking. How might the practice of labelling something a
‘failure’ do damage? How does the label and negative valence of failure
work over time to foster an equally negative sensibility toward change
or approaches that seek to transgress boundaries? While invention and
experimentation are encouraged in the hard sciences and failure is
actually expected, ‘transgressiveness’ is discouraged in fields where
adherence to disciplinary standards is a powerful delimiter of
experimentation and risk.

This can be taken further by returning to the classic feminist critiques
of positivist science by such authors as Sandra Harding[^09Annette_21] or the
complications of sensemaking elaborated by such scholars as Haraway[^09Annette_22]
and Karen Barad.[^09Annette_23] The value of building from these works is to
continue the long effort to resist the hegemonic power of everyday
discourses around how inquiry happens. In this, Gramscian inspired
critical theory is valuable as a way of recognizing that failure is part
of a larger structure that over time becomes naturalized and
neutralized, whereby certain ways of doing things become accepted and
consensual yet still privilege certain stakeholder interests over
others’ by valuing only particular ways of doing and being. Regaining
the connection between our embodied, knowing, culturally specific senses
and the moments of keen learning — labelled failure or not — is an
open-ended exploration, a way of reflecting on our reflections of our
own practices within The Academy.

It is a politic and ethic of resistance, one that contributes to the
longstanding and continuing efforts to decolonize narrow Western ideas
about causality, scale, knowing, and sensemaking. This goes beyond
simply challenging the negative valence of failure. It is a matter of
deliberately and robustly interrogating how the attribution of failure
happens, with what potential or actual consequences —both positive and
negative — for the people involved as well as for future infrastructures
of inquiry practices.

## What if failure didn’t really exist?

The three principles above are examples of rethinking how failure
functions, or ways of resisting the label in one’s own practice, to gain
more specificity about what is really happening, since ‘failure’ is such
an all-encompassing yet somewhat meaningless term. There are other
principles that can emerge as one creatively digs beneath the surface to
consider how recasting the term or playfully rejecting it might be
useful to one’s own practice.

And it’s worth noting that these creative or playful practices of
reconsidering the definition and utility of the concept of failure may
require building phrases or mantras to repel or push back against the
dominant narratives that repeatedly tell us that failure is the opposite
of success. Even doodling can help provide these mantras, as you see me
doing in the middle of a workshop in 2018, in Figures 4.2 and 4.3.

![](media/image2.jpg){width="2.7597222222222224in"
height="4.189583333333333in"}

Figure 5.2: Rethinking the concept of failure as a type of infinity
spiral. Sketches by the author from a 2018 workshop in Barcelona.
Source: Annette Markham. Used with permission

![](media/image3.jpeg){width="2.5854166666666667in"
height="2.5166666666666666in"}

Figure 5.3: Asking a speculative ‘what if?’ question about ‘Failure’ as
a traveling club. Source: Annette Markham. Used with Permission.

As I conclude this chapter, I must admit that I have never believed in
failure. Everything labelled as failure is nothing more or less than an
outcome. Within this definition, failure never actually exists as
‘failure.’ When it involves research, if we think of the action
preceding an outcome as ‘experiment,’ we can gain knowledge from
scrutinizing how and why certain outcomes happen, versus other
possibilities. Removing the negative or positive valence removes the
label itself. The only exception is when failure is used to describe a
mechanism that no longer functions as intended, as mentioned at the
outset of this essay, as when a spark plug on a combustion engine no
longer fires, or the key gets stuck in the lock. Otherwise, anything we
label as failure simply highlights a critical juncture, inviting us to
pause, look around, and reflect for a moment as we make another decision
to do the next thing, which will inevitably turn us this way or that on
whatever journey we are on. Recast in this way, we can further specify
failures as informational, indicators of pathways, and pointers for
thinking otherwise.

## Bibliography

Babineaux, John D. and Krumboltz, Ryan. *Fail Fast, Fail Often: How
Losing Can Help You Win*, Penguin, 2013.

Barad, Karen. *Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the
Entanglement of Matter and Meaning*, Durham: Duke University Press,
2007.

Barwich, Ann-Sophie. ‘The Value of Failure in Science: The Story of
Grandmother Cells in Neuroscience,’ *Frontiers in Neuroscience* 13 (24
October 2019): 1121, https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2019.01121.

Blache. K.M. and Shrivastava, A.B. ‘Defining Failure of Manufacturing
Machinery and Equipment,’ in *Proceedings of Annual Reliability and
Maintainability Symposium (RAMS)* (Annual Reliability and
Maintainability Symposium (RAMS), Anaheim, CA, USA: IEEE, 1994), pp.
69–75, https://doi.org/10.1109/RAMS.1994.291084.

Clark, Alexander and Sousa, Bailey. ‘Academics: You Are Going to Fail,
so Learn How to Do It Better,’ *The Guardian*, 4 November 2015,
https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/nov/04/academics-you-are-going-to-fail-so-learn-how-to-do-it-better.

Edmondson, Amy C. ‘Strategies for Learning from Failure,’ *Harvard
Business Review*, March 2011,
<https://hbr.org/2011/04/strategies-for-learning-from-failure>.

Halberstam, Jack. *The Queer Art of Failure*, Durham: Duke University
Press, 2011.

Haraway, Donna. ‘SF: Science Fiction, Speculative Fabulation, String
Figures, So Far,’ *Ada: A Journal of Gender, New Media, and Technology*,
3 (2013), doi:10.7264/N3KH0K81

\_\_\_\_. *Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene*,
Durham: Duke University Press, 2016.

Harding, Sandra. *The Science Question in Feminism*, Cornell: Cornell
University Press, 1986.

Markham, Annette. ‘Ethic as Method, Method as Ethic: A Case for
Reflexivity in Qualitative ICT Research,’ *Journal of Information
Ethics* 15.2 (2006): 37–54, https://doi.org/10.3172/JIE.15.2.37.

\_\_\_\_. ‘Reflexivity: Some Techniques for Interpretive Researchers,’
*Annette Markham*, 28 February 2017,
https://annettemarkham.com/2017/02/reflexivity-for-interpretive-researchers/.

McArdle, Megan. *The Up Side of Down: Why Failing Well Is the Key to
Success*, New York: Viking Adult, 2014.

Porter, Alex. ‘Success through Failure with Accelerated Stress Testing,’
*Intertek*, 8 June 2021, https://www.intertek.com/

Sousa, Bailey and Clark, Alexander. ‘A Manifesto for Better Research
Failure,’ *International Journal of Qualitative Methods*, 2020,
https://doi.org/doi.org/10.1177/1609406920973858.

[^09Annette_1]: Jack Halberstam, *The Queer Art of Failure*, Durham, NC: Duke
    University Press, 2011.

[^09Annette_2]: John D. Babineaux and Ryan Krumboltz, *Fail Fast, Fail Often: How
    Losing Can Help You Win*, Penguin, 2013.

[^09Annette_3]: Megan McArdle, *The Up Side of Down: Why Failing Well Is the Key
    to Success*, New York, New York: Viking Adult, 2014.

[^09Annette_4]: Babineaux and Krumboltz, *Fail Fast*, 50.

[^09Annette_5]: Alexander Clark and Bailey Sousa, ‘Academics: You Are Going to
    Fail, so Learn How to Do It Better,’ *The Guardian*, 4 November
    2015, sec. Education,
    <https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/nov/04/academics-you-are-going-to-fail-so-learn-how-to-do-it-better>;
    Bailey Sousa and Alexander Clark, ‘A Manifesto for Better Research
    Failure,’ *International Journal of Qualitative Methods*, 2020,
    https://doi.org/doi.org/10.1177/1609406920973858.

[^09Annette_6]: Sousa and Clark, ‘A Manifesto’, n.p.

[^09Annette_7]: Clark and Sousa, ‘Academics’.

[^09Annette_8]: Amy C. Edmondson, ‘Strategies for Learning from Failure,’ *Harvard
    Business Review*, March 2011,
    https://hbr.org/2011/04/strategies-for-learning-from-failure.

[^09Annette_9]: K.M. Blache and A.B. Shrivastava, ‘Defining Failure of
    Manufacturing Machinery and Equipment,’ in *Proceedings of Annual
    Reliability and Maintainability Symposium (RAMS)* (Annual
    Reliability and Maintainability Symposium (RAMS), Anaheim, CA, USA:
    IEEE, 1994), pp. 69–75, https://doi.org/10.1109/RAMS.1994.291084.

[^09Annette_10]: Alex Porter, ‘Success through Failure with Accelerated Stress
    Testing,’ *Intertek,* 8 June 2021, https://www.intertek.com/.

[^09Annette_11]: Ann-Sophie Barwich, ‘The Value of Failure in Science: The Story
    of Grandmother Cells in Neuroscience,’ *Frontiers in Neuroscience*
    13 (24 October 2019): 1121,
    https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2019.01121.

[^09Annette_12]: Barwich, ‘The Value of Failure in Science’, n.p.

[^09Annette_13]: Barwich, The Value of Failure in Science’, n.p.

[^09Annette_14]: Sousa and Clark, ‘A Manifesto,’ n.p.

[^09Annette_15]: Annette Markham, ‘Ethic as Method, Method as Ethic: A Case for
    Reflexivity in Qualitative ICT Research,’ *Journal of Information
    Ethics* 15.2 (2006): 37–54, https://doi.org/10.3172/JIE.15.2.37.

[^09Annette_16]: Annette Markham, ‘Reflexivity: Some Techniques for Interpretive
    Researchers,’ *Annette Markham*, 28 February 2017,
    https://annettemarkham.com/2017/02/reflexivity-for-interpretive-researchers/.

[^09Annette_17]: Donna Haraway, ‘SF: Science Fiction, Speculative Fabulation,
    String Figures, So Far,’ *Ada: A Journal of Gender, New Media, and
    Technology*, 3(2013), doi:10.7264/N3KH0K81.

[^09Annette_18]: Donna Haraway, *Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the
    Chthulucene*, Duke University Press, 2016.

[^09Annette_19]: Haraway, *Staying with the Trouble.*

[^09Annette_20]: Haraway, ‘SF’, n.p.

[^09Annette_21]: Sandra Harding, *The Science Question in Feminism*, Cornell
    University Press, 1986.

[^09Annette_22]: Haraway, *Staying with the Trouble.*

[^09Annette_23]: Karen Barad, *Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and
    the Entanglement of Matter and Meaning*, Durham: Duke University
    Press, 2007.
