---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Digital Agency and the Authorship of Failure\
Anna Hickey-Moody 

In this chapter I intentionally problematize popular ways of valuing
research and shift registers for what we might expect to see when
reading ‘research.’ Empirical research assemblages call researchers to
inhabit diverse forms of radically different worlds. These worlds can
profoundly dis-organize and re-distribute us as ethnographers and
people. Often, communication across and within worlds relies on
algorithmic forms of mediation or digital platforms.

I contend that we need more academic work unpacking the politics of
feeling like a failure in ethnographic fieldwork and exploring the
complex agencies of research assemblages, which modulate the
subjectivity of empirical researchers. I argue that digital agency is
gendered and is part of the algorithmic worlds in which feminist digital
researchers work. As such, we need to develop our own failure archives
of the roles played by digital agency and digital failure in the
production of experiences of failure in research assemblages.

## Digital psychopaths?

Machines have no humility. Artificial intelligence and algorithmic
assemblages have no feelings, no ethical conscience, no capacity to
relate on interpersonal levels. In human terms, machines, algorithmic
assemblages, forms of artificial intelligence, are, effectively,
psychopaths. That is, if we take a psychopath to be a body (assemblage)
suffering from an ‘(antisocial) disorder in which an individual
manifests amoral and antisocial behavior, shows a lack of ability to
love or establish meaningful personal relationships, expresses extreme
egocentricity, and demonstrates a failure to learn from experience and
other behaviors associated with the condition’[^10Anna_1], then a machine would
be diagnosed as having psychopathy. This is not to reduce the complexity
of mental illness or equivocate mental illness to a non-human
characteristic, but to point out the fact that digital technology has no
remorse (indeed no capacity for remorse) and a complete absence of
empathy for others. Despite this fact, humans need to relate to and rely
on digital technologies and the agency of digital technologies in ways
that are comparable to the kinds of reliance we have on other people.
Shared memories, information, thoughts, notes are held in this
relationality.

Algorithms do not have personal relationships. They are designed to make
money. There is an irony here, however, in the fact that algorithms have
been developed to facilitate personal relationships even though they do
not have personal relationships themselves. Despite this, and through
necessity, I outsource so much of my memory work, archival work, and
research recording to machines, digital spaces, and algorithmically
mediated platforms.

Building on my recent work on experiences of failure in the gendered
research assemblage,[^10Anna_2] I argue that thinking critically about digital
agency and digitally orchestrated failure really matters in supporting
the work of emerging feminist digital ethnographers. This approach is
important for understanding how, as researchers, our own experiences of
failing in the field are produced. Losing data, being locked out of
online accounts, electronic equipment breaking, being hacked, video and
sound recording errors: digital technology brings with it a distributed
network of increased possibility for failure. When we outsource memory
and data recording we distribute the network we rely on for recall and
recording and increase possibilities for failure.

I already suffer from forgetfulness. I have a clinical diagnosis of
PTSD, which impairs one’s memory, and I live with a significant level of
professional stress which impacts memory. I often ask digital devices to
help me retain information. However, as I have learnt, digital devices,
algorithms, and mediated platforms can lose more information in one
moment than I ever have (as yet). This is difficult to recuperate.

Jack Halberstam has suggested that forgetfulness can be queer, or
queering; it can be a problematization of the known.[^10Anna_3] Yet as
Halberstam[^10Anna_4] also reminds us, even forgetting can become over coded by
capitalism:

> Forgetfulness is not always queer, of course; indeed in the early
> twenty-first century it has become a major trope of mainstream cinema.
> But while most forms of forgetting in mainstream cinema operate
> according to a simple mapping of memory onto identity and memory loss
> onto the loss of history, location, and even politics, a few films,
> often unintentionally, set forgetting in motion in such a way as to
> undermine dominant modes of historicizing.[^10Anna_5]

Even failing and forgetting can become a trope and can be purposed for
financial gain.

Further, feeling like a failure in the research assemblage is an
experience that is not often discussed in the literature on research
methods, particularly in relation to digital methods. For example,
Catherine Dawson’s *A-Z of Digital Research Methods,*[^10Anna_6] Peter
Halfpenny and Rob Proctor’s *Innovations in Digital Methods,*[^10Anna_7] and
Cristina Costa and Jenna Condle’s *Doing Research in and on the Digital:
Research Methods Across Fields of Inquiry*[^10Anna_8] respectively offer
comprehensive examinations of digital research methods, none of which
examine the extended possibilities of failure and loss that accompany
the digitalization of research data collection and storage. Failure is
seemingly not conceived as an embedded aspect of method, although
failure is, in fact, embedded in everything we do. Women are often
especially aware of this.

Women are consistently positioned as failing to achieve their gender
successfully. Being too large, too loud, infertile, critical, or bossy
are all qualities that are popularly turned ‘against’ women as examples
of failure to achieve their gender successfully. This experience of
failure is echoed in the research assemblage through concerns about
developing a ‘strong’ or ‘robust’ data set, discussions of strong and
weak data, and rhetoric recounting successful analysis. Gendered tropes
of mastery prevail in how embodiment is policed, remade, performed,
taught, and understood. Failing to achieve mastery, loss, emptiness, and
forgetfulness are constituent aspects of the very ideas of mastery,
achievement, success, achievement, and recall.

Contemporary research and communication assemblages have become entwined
in digital platforms in ways that researchers are not able to avoid.
There are intersections of the personal and professional that are
mediated by digital platforms. In what follows, I offer an
auto-ethnographic account of my own journey of digital forgetting and
the loss of enmeshed personal and research data. This was an experience
that made me reflect upon the extent to which I have come to rely on
digital platforms as a form of professional and personal memory.

## Outsourcing Memory and Media Rituals 

José van Dijck has suggested:

> as memories are increasingly mediated and thus constructed by
> networked technologies, the boundaries between present and past are no
> longer given, but they are the very stakes in debating what counts as
> memory. Memory, after the connective turn, is a new mediatized memory
> that challenges currently dominant concepts of time and space.[^10Anna_9]

Andrew Hoskin also argues that contemporary memory is distributed
through digital networks and embedded in socio-technical practices and
calls for networked memory.[^10Anna_10] My own experiences of outsourcing
memory and distributed media rituals supports these arguments. On the
17^th^ April 2012 in Shoreditch, East London, I made the first post to
my current Instagram account. My previous account was lost to me due to
a work email change when I moved to London to teach at Goldsmiths, and
with it my access to control over the digital archive of my memories. In
my new account, I posted a giant green flying bee or wasp painted on a
historic wall in Shoreditch, the blue and white national trust plaque
not quite readable in the top right-hand corner of the image. This was
not a political statement—just an expression of a being-in-placeness of
my contemporary moment. Images marking significant life events
(finishing a book, getting married), experiences (*The Sisters Hope*
show in Mälmo), places (London Pleasure gardens, the black heart bar,
street shrines, Cambridge), populate my early timeline. Meeting my
brother in Bratislava, spending time with him in Vienna, getting to know
his wild, anarchist housemates and then heading to Paris for the
*International Crossroads in Cultural Studies* conference are events
only documented on my Instagram account.

Previous workplaces, homes, social events, desserts shared with students
(one of whom is now dead), conferences organized, vows witnessed,
romance. Teaching in the Louisiana Museum of Art (Denmark), time with
family in Dublin, holidays in Milan. A cycling holiday with my
girlfriend to Lulworth Cove. Keynotes given in Mälmo (Sweden), Aarhus
(Denmark), Maribor (Slovenia). These are events I have no documents
recording, other than those technically owned by Meta. I can’t remember
my password to download the data. I think it’s written in a diary I have
somewhere. I must remember to look when back from fieldwork.

Over the 10 years since I started this account, it has become my most
significant archival practice for work (including research milestones
and significant fieldwork moments), travel, significant life events. In
retrospect, I realized that a lot of what I lost was generated through
what we might call a media ritual: the marking of an important life
moment through posting it on social media. In their book *Everyday Data
Cultures*, Burgess et al. discuss ‘media rituals’[^10Anna_11], drawing on Lee
Humphries’[^10Anna_12] discussion of practices of documentation, which turn
everyday mundane activities into what Humphries calls ‘media accounts’.
These media accounts add up to a public record of everyday life that
have real meaning for people. Media accounts show us how people connect
to and shape online identity in both personal and professional
capacities. Often the two are intentionally blurred thorough the digital
platforms they mobilize.

Some fieldwork data is only on my personal Instagram — snaps of artworks
taken in the field that turned out to really capture a work or a moment
very effectively. I have naïvely backed myself into a corner: so many
things that matter to me are remembered and indeed owned primarily by a
digital platform with no ethics, no relationality, no humility.

One day it was all deleted. Someone tried to hack into the account and
Meta wiped it. I had outsourced my memories and the algorithm stole my
past. I had archived my thinking digitally, on Instagram, a platform
owned by global corporation Meta, and my intellectual and emotional
labor was destroyed. I was left wondering: what does this ritualized
attention to a mutable and fallible memory archive say about memory in
late capitalism? What does it mean for identity? After a couple of weeks
I had the content restored, and have most certainly learnt my lesson
that the content is not owned by me.

When we rely so heavily on digital platforms to retain, organize, and
share the products of our labor, we also rely on them to record and
memorialize our most precious moments. Simultaneously, we give these
digital platforms the power to forget for us. Halberstam[^10Anna_13] suggests
there are no fixed values between remembering and forgetting. Memory can
be a disciplinary thing that makes one think about the past in certain
ways, and in relation to certain disciplines. Forgetfulness has the
potential to allow for new narratives to be created. There are
conservative forms of forgetting — forgetting that is designed to allow
a continuation of forms of the same. National memories of colonial
countries are filled with forms of amnesia that have an ideological
value for regimes that want to cover up bad deeds. However, what
Halberstam is interested in is the possibility of queering family
reproduction and traditional identity narratives through forgetting
information, bloodlines, memories. Digital amnesia orchestrated through
capitalist platforms has no political purchase or significance. It is
mindless loss.

## Digital Failure Archives 

As I have noted, Jack Halberstam[^10Anna_14] suggests that failure is one of
the ways that we can escape the normative constraints of ‘success’.
Implicitly, failure can be seen as a critique of the terms of success.
Indeed, within failure is embedded a fierce critique of all that is
embedded in normativity, as normativity *implies* success. Thinking back
on my experience of working with digital technology to collect data for
fieldwork, I can see an archive of failure; an archive of moments and
episodes of loss. Video cameras not working, devices being used in the
wrong way, children photographing strange objects, being locked out of
digital devices, losing passwords. The internet now houses vast
quantities of information I generated but can no longer access and
information that I did not mean to generate but is digitally archived in
my name, or stored on a profile I own. Children taking research
equipment have generated a decent amount of the data I have generated
but do not own.

This brings us back to the question of externalized memory on
commercialized platforms. Data might be in our name, but often we do not
own it. Further, what is our relationship to material generated by
others on our platforms or that we have reshared? Digital archives
documenting my research failures, or moments of failure in research
which I organized, are collected in virtual spaces — only some of which
I can access. What will happen to these digital catalogues of my
fieldwork? Can anyone access them? Will they ever be able to be
retrieved? I suspect these are questions which will never be answered.
In contemporary research cultures, machines can fail for us.

## Conclusion

This writing is an exploration of intersections of experiences of
failure in fieldwork. I am not looking to advance a specific pedagogical
or conceptual point, but, rather, I see utility in creating space to
discuss the everyday nature of failure that we experience. As Raymond
Williams’[^10Anna_15] thoughts on structures of feeling have taught us, what
‘feels’ everyday is wrought with structural issues and politics. The
intersection of this is our consciousness. Specifically, in this
example, I want to start to think about the power to fail, and the power
to create failure, that digital platforms now possess within our
research assemblages.

Through drawing on my experience as a woman researcher undertaking
digital ethnographic fieldwork, I am trying to normalize the
articulation of experiences of failure. More than this, though, I am
explicating how the distributed agency of digital platforms and
algorithms exponentially increase the possibilities for experiencing
failure in the field. Not only might I forget the occurrence of an
event, but all documentation of the event may indeed be lost due to a
technological error.

So much of the data I have worked to create is lost to me, but it still
exists somewhere in the digitalized world where it may or may not be
‘owned’ and farmed in a capitalist system. This creates an interesting
entanglement between queer failure as a resistance to capitalist
heteronormativity and the capitalist mechanics of the world we live in.
Is my failure feeding capitalism? My thinking here circles back here to
the question of gender and digital agency with which I opened the essay:
who ‘owns’ failure, or who (or what) fails, and how we can reclaim and
articulate that experience of failure in a gendered world of research
and digital media? Can there be an outside to digital failure that does
not result in capitalist gain? In a move to ‘do queer failure better’, I
want to be that outside.

## Bibliography

Burgess, Jean, Albury, Kath, McCosker, Anthony, and Wilken, Rowan.
*Everyday Data Cultures,* London: John Wiley & Sons, 2022.

Costa, Cristina, and Condle, Jenna. *Doing Research in and on the
Digital: Research Methods*, London: Routledge, 2018.

Dawson, Catherine. *A-Z of Digital Research Methods*, London: Routledge,
2019.

Halberstam, Jack. *The Queer Art of Failure*, Durham: Duke University
Press, 2011.

Halfpenny, Peter and Proctor, Rob. *Innovations in Digital Methods*,
London: Sage, 2015.

Hermann, Henry. ‘Alternate Human Behavior,’ in Henry R. Hermann (ed),
*Dominance and Aggression in Humans and Other Animals*, San Diego:
Academic Press, 2017, pp. 139-57.

Hickey-Moody, Anna. ‘Three Ways of Knowing Failure’, *M.I.A: Feminism
and Visual Culture*, 4.4 (2019): 1-30.

Hoskin, Andrew. ‘Digital Network Memory’, in Astrid Erll and Ann Rigney
(eds), *Mediation, Remediation and the Dynamics of Cultural Memory*,
Berlin and New York: de Gruyter, 2009.

Humphreys, Lee. *The Qualified Self: Social Media and the Accounting of
Everyday Life*, Minneapolis: MIT Press, 2018.

Van Dijck, José. ‘Flickr and the Culture of Connectivity: Sharing Views,
Experiences, Memories’, *Memory Studies*, 20.10 (2010), 4. See also José
van Dijck, *Connectivity: A Critical History of Social Media*, Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2013.

Williams, Raymond. *Politics and Letters: Interviews with the New Left
Review*, London: New Left Books, 1979.

[^10Anna_1]: Henry Hermann, ‘Alternate Human Behavior,’ in Henry R. Hermann
    (ed), *Dominance and Aggression in Humans and Other Animals*, San
    Diego: Academic Press, 2017, pp. 139-57.

[^10Anna_2]: Anna Hickey-Moody, ‘Three Ways of Knowing Failure’, *M.I.A:
    Feminism and Visual Culture*, 4.4 (2019): 1-30.

[^10Anna_3]: Jack Halberstam, *The Queer Art of Failure*, Durham: Duke
    University Press, 2011.

[^10Anna_4]: Halberstam, *The Queer Art of Failure,* 74.

[^10Anna_5]: Halberstam, *The Queer Art of Failure,* 74.

[^10Anna_6]: Catherine Dawson, *A-Z of Digital Research Methods*, United
    Kingdom: Taylor and Francis, 2019.

[^10Anna_7]: Peter Halfpenny and Rob Proctor, *Innovations in Digital Methods*,
    United Kingdom: SAGE, 2015.

[^10Anna_8]: Cristina Costa and Jenna Condle, *Doing Research in and on the
    Digital: Research Methods*, United Kingdom: Routledge, 2018.

[^10Anna_9]: José Van Dijck, ‘Flickr and the Culture of Connectivity: Sharing
    Views, Experiences, Memories’, *Memory Studies*, 20.10 (2010), 4.
    See also José van Dijck, *Connectivity: A Critical History of Social
    Media*, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013.

[^10Anna_10]: Andrew Hoskin, ‘Digital Network Memory’, in Astrid Erll and Ann
    Rigny (eds), *Mediation, Remediation and the Dynamics of Cultural
    Memory*, Berlin: de Gruyter, 2009.

[^10Anna_11]: Jean Burgess, Kath Albury, Anthony McCosker, and Rowan Wilken,
    *Everyday Data Cultures,* United Kingdom: John Wiley & Sons, 2022.

[^10Anna_12]: Lee Humphreys, *The Qualified Self: Social Media and the
    Accounting of Everyday Life*, Cambridge: MIT Press, 2018, 35.

[^10Anna_13]: Halberstam, *The Queer Art of Failure.*

[^10Anna_14]: Halberstam, *The Queer Art of Failure. *

[^10Anna_15]: Raymond Williams, *Politics and Letters: Interviews with the New
    Left Review*, London: New Left Books, 1979.
