---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Reworlding: Speculative Futuring in the Endtimes, in the Everywhen\
**Jen Rae and Claire G. Coleman**

 

*Activities by the Centre for Reworlding are made possible while living
on the unceded lands of the Wurrundjeri, Taungurung, and Dja Dja Wurrung
peoples. We pay our respects to their ancestors and elders past and
present.*

## Introduction

In ecology, when external conditions become hostile, organisms gain a
higher chance of survival in refugia. In isolation, they reorganize
their biological process to increase in numbers or strength until the
disturbance abates. They must evolve to survive to gain a possible
future. The risk of failure is extinction.

Our moment in the spacetime of the world is one in which we as humans
have failed to exist in an equilibrium with nature and in which our
connections with our non-human ancestors are broken. Complex and
compounding human system failures have placed our species and our
non-human relations on a long march towards the next extinction event,
one that we created and one that will likely lead to great suffering.
Adaptation is our only recourse. We must evolve to gain a liveable
future.

In our increasingly climate-change impacted future, we at the Centre for
Reworlding ask:

What are the conversations that we aren’t having now that might aid us,
our loved ones, and our future ancestors?

What are the skills and knowledges at the thresholds of being forever
lost, overlooked, or undervalued that our future generations may need
for survival?

And what are we willing to give up and/or fight for in the greatest
challenge facing humanity?

Where do we begin? How will we reorganize?

We begin by reworlding.

This chapter reflects upon and weaves together some of the stories
emerging from our collaboration on *REFUGIUM* (2021),[^13Jenrae_1] an Incinerator
Art Gallery award-winning short film of speculative fiction in the
climate emergency context, and the activities of the Centre for
Reworlding, a collective formed around our collaborative work
intersecting art, disaster risk reduction, and resilience within the
climate emergency context. Our practice centres First Nations knowledge
systems and protocols, where time and compounding existential crises
converge to delve into moral dilemmas of life and death, and where we
hone in on themes of child-centred trauma prevention and
intergenerational justice in the coming collapse. Speculative futuring
is a way of decoupling from maladaptive ways of engaging/disengaging
with the climate emergency context to reorganize our relational thinking
and being.

Engaging with the discipline of the imagination allows us to take
calculated risks, experiment, understand our capacities, and fail
together in creative hypothetical practices so we may change course,
reorganize, and hopefully create a thriving and liveable world for
future generations. Failure through speculative futuring is creatively
and critically holding calculated risk in one hand, adapting and
preparing for potential threats in the other, and simultaneously it is
an outcome to avoid at all costs.

## Reworlding

‘Reworlding’ was coined in Jen Rae’s speculative fiction story *Centre
for Reworlding: Umbilica Homepage* (2020) as it relates to three
Indigenous futuring and survivance relationships — rematriation,
reconciliation, and resurgence — acknowledging some of the tensions and
contractions these concepts have in Indigenous and non-Indigenous usage.
Jen refers to Métis Elder Maria Campbell’s oration on the role of
artists in reconciliation as described by Métis author Erica Violet Lee
in her essay discussing Indigenous futures. Campbell says that artists
and writers are mirrors to people showing them ‘we build what could have
been or should have been’ prior to colonial disruption, through which
Lee writes that by cultivating an understanding our relationships to
histories, kin and land, we can begin to build new worlds[^13Jenrae_2] drawing
from our complex cosmologies and reconnecting storylines.

While ‘worlding’ has been explored by scholars such as Haraway[^13Jenrae_3] and
Spivak[^13Jenrae_4], the authors of this chapter are Indigenous and write from
this perspective through praxis and art as ‘this
decolonization/Indigenization is necessary in order to bring Indigenous
epistemologies, ontologies, and practices to the fore in a meaningful
and ethical way’.[^13Jenrae_5] Reworlding also considers the ‘everywhen’ — a time
that is outside of time where everything can be seen at once and where
nothing new can be created, only discovered — a term originally coined
by anthropologist W.E.H. Stanner in his 1956 essay *The Dreaming*,[^13Jenrae_6] a
highly regarded piece of writing on race relations and Australian
Aboriginal culture. The everywhen acknowledges that time is non-linear
encompassing past, present, and future simultaneously and is integrated
as a way of life for many First Peoples. Reworlding is an active
presence of looking back to look forward, always acknowledging the
eternal now. This time we live in, the Anthropocene, is therefore also
part of the everywhen. The questions explored in our film *REFUGIUM*
(2021) is the unearthing and what we attempt to do together through the
Centre for Reworlding (C∞R) is the reorganising — refugia.

Speculative practices can provide the ability to see and shape the world
in a different way — to divide our reality from our imaginings, and to
decouple our history and future from time in the everywhen. The long
imaginary helps us prepare, prioritize, and know what’s worth fighting
for when hope becomes fleeting — as written on our first banner
*COLLAPSE//SURVIVE* (2020). To collapse is to honour the bully, the
colonizer, the capitalist, the future-killer, and bask in the failings
of centuries of extractive genocidal mania. To survive, unfuck, and
reworld is to honour resurgence, intergenerational justice,
rematriation, and culture — as written on our second banner
*UNFUCK&gt;&gt;REWORLD* (2022).

Social change has always been a topic for speculative fiction — to
transcend realities and corporealities. In the climate emergency
context, as global temperatures rise at accelerating rates, timescales
and impacts expand and detract, and we become numb to lives lost daily
from disease and disaster. Now more than ever, there is a role for arts
and culture to lean into the tensions, to tell the unpalpable stories
along with the rousing, and to ensure we have skin in the long game.

Exploring risk through experimental speculative practice invites failure
as fodder for learning together with audience, communities, and
participants. It is part of the reorganising of thinking and relations.
One of the limitations and challenges of climate emergency communication
is its ‘failure to activate the public imagination to the potential
risks and consequences of disaster especially in an urban context’.[^13Jenrae_7]
Whereas artists are deeply embedded in the discipline of the
imagination, allowing us to see with collaborators and audiences
alternate futures, delve into scenario mapping, and practice
hypotheticals where the stakes are lower, risks can be explored and
failures allow for course correction/re-direction.

## Backstory

To put the Centre for Reworlding in context, the impetus for us to begin
collaborating began in early 2020 when we were both invited to
participate in a two-week artist-exchange residency in Sydney, hosted by
Sydney Festival (Australia) and Other Sights for Artists’ Projects
(Canada) and curated by Vanessa Kwan, Barbara Cole, Lorna Brown, and
Sunshine Frère. Sandwiched between the catastrophic Australian Black
Summer bushfires and the COVID-19 pandemic, *The Future is Floating*
residency centred intersectionality, often underrepresented in dominant
climate emergency discourses, which is now recognized as a failing in
communicating to diverse publics as demonstrated in many climate
emergency action plans. The residency brought together settler, Black,
and Indigenous artists to connect and create a culture of exchange to
discuss shared colonial histories, art, futures, and collectivity —
water, sound, activism, and performance being common threads between the
artists. The water on which we floated, the Parramatta River and Sydney
Harbour, were poisoned, polluted, and severely wounded by the ongoing
colonization event giving our works a mournful but urgent energy.

The invitation to be in ceremony and learn from Elders of the Simms,
Timbery, and other La Perouse Kameygal families, the experience of being
aboard the Aboriginal-owned Tribal Warrior boat for the residency
events, performances, and programs, and the contested political climate
in Australia left strong impressions and influenced some of the artist’s
creative responses including ours. The experience of collaborative art
making grew into a practice of collective protest. The making and
performance became a methodology for activism. Many works developed with
extinction peri-colonization as their themes.

All artists were preselected by the curators into four collaborative
performance groups. We were placed in a group with Tkaranto
(Toronto)-based artist-scholar-activist Syrus Marcus Ware and
Dharug-Dharwal artist Venessa Possum. Claire performed a reading of *WE
ARE WATER* (2020), a poem speaking about the loss of land and water
during colonization, and the connection between colonization and the
loss of everything that matters to Indigenous people. Central to the
work was an understanding of the difference between Indigenous notions
of sacred water and the failure of Western developments that see water
as a commodity at best and a garbage dump at worst.

Jen performed *Sleepwalking into Extinction* (2019) as the persona
Ellis, who arrives from the year 2130 with a call from the future
speaking to the rise of nihilistic and fundamentalist thinking in the
climate emergency. She offers do-it-together instructions on how to
defeat the fanatic and halt the sixth mass extinction event. To the
audiences’ surprise, the Tribal Warrior was then steered as close to
Kirribilli House as possible (then Prime Minister Scott Morrison’s
official residence in Sydney Harbour), blaring Jen and Marco
Cher-Gibard’s sound-score *Evacuate* (2019).

*Evacuate* is an intense 12-minute journey that starts with the
‘simplicity of a beckoning church bell and builds to a maniacal
cacophony of alarms, sirens, and emergency announcements \[…\] reaching
a crescendo where the mind imagines near-apocalyptic scenarios \[…\]
\[until\] the sound gradually subsides to the gentle lapping of water’,
as described by art critic Jennifer Barry^.^[^13Jenrae_8] The public audience
were then encouraged by Ellis to partake in a protest stance aimed at
Scott Morrison’s government for their abject failure to act on climate
change and the catastrophic bushfires.

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.2625317147856516in"
height="2.4448982939632544in"}
Our first collaborative banner
*COLLAPSE//SURVIVE* (2020) hung from the bow of the boat (Figure 8.1)
and was later carried in the Sydney Invasion Day Rally (Figure 8.2). The
text highlighted the prophetic doomsday tensions present in contemporary
discourses on the compounding human and ecological systems failures we
now call the climate emergency or what Margaret Atwood more
appropriately calls ‘everything change’.[^13Jenrae_9] It also called for the
collapse of colonial and capitalist power systems and transcending
reconciliation towards Indigenous resurgence where we all have the
‘courage and imagination to envision life beyond the state’.[^13Jenrae_10]

Figure 8.1: *Collapse//Survive* (2020) banner tethered to the Mari Nawi
— Tribal Warrior boat. Photo: Vanessa Kwan. Used with permission.

![](media/image2.jpeg){width="3.2639206036745407in"
height="2.4470341207349082in"}

Figure 8.2: *Collapse//Survive* (2020) banner carried in the Sydney
Invasion Day Rally on Gadigal lands, 26 January 2020. Photo: Salote
Tawale. Used with permission.

The *Future is Floating* experience and the content of our respective
performances aboard the Tribal Warrior led us both to commit to
exploring how we might further collaborate, as it was apparent we were
creatively operating within the same zeitgeist. We recognized that we
are both interrogating through speculative futuring the existential
crisis of the times.

The opportunity came through Melbourne performance venue Arts House,
where we proposed an experimental performance work within their
multiyear REFUGE program. However, due to the Melbourne COVID-19
lockdown restrictions in March 2020 and the professional impact of
project suspensions, our creative development moved online and resulted
in almost weekly Zoom meetings.

In April 2020, it became more evident that our future imaginings were
rapidly becoming current realities thus opening new crevices to explore
in our collaboration. As speculative futurists we noted that events of
early 2020 and the socio-political fallout in Australia and other
Western nations mirrored colonial histories and stories within science
fiction films and literature (e.g. *Soylent Green* (1973)*, Foundation*
(1951)*, The Sea and the Summer* (1987)*,* etc*.*).

This realization propelled us to ask in our discussions: *what are the
conversations that we aren’t having now that might aid us, our
communities, and our future ancestors?* Answering this question requires
a preparedness mindset with many tendrils, trajectories, and
temporalities. It speaks to accountability, empathy, and
intergenerational justice — themes often absent in Western discourses,
especially in relation to climate resilient futures. 

A few months later, we both participated in artists’ Alex Kelly and
David Pledger complex digital project *Assembly for the Future*[^13Jenrae_11] for
the BLEED festival — a project exploring multiple near futures*.*
Claire’s provocative oration *Beyond Whiteness* — *The Rise of New
Power* spoke from an imagined future about the end of racism, the
beginning of a healthy post-colonial culture, and how it was achieved.
Jen Rae’s ‘Dispatch from the Future’ response titled *Centre for
Reworlding: Umbilica Homepage* (2020) was a short story marking the
10^th^ anniversary of a fictional underground group of mothers,
grandmothers, sisters, and aunties who mobilize in the collapse to
support one another and the next generation through the practice of
reworlding, an integrated practice of knowledge sharing, radical
empathy, and child-centred trauma prevention.

Jen’s short story was influenced by her then present experience of
living within 20 metres of Australia’s largest COVID-19 outbreak,
witnessing and shielding a young pre-schooler at home to the human
tragedy unfolding nearby. In hindsight, this experience and our
participation in *Assembly for the Future* formed a second critical
turning point in our collaboration with the lingering questions: *can we
imagine a world without racism? Can we imagine a world where in one
hundred years, children aren’t traumatized by the impacts of climate
change as they continue to unfold as a way of life? What can we unearth
from our ancestral knowledges and other overlooked knowledge systems to
support a new imagining, knowing and being for the future? *

This last question references what we now call ‘reworlding’ and the
conceptual framework came together in our short film *REFUGIUM* (2021).

## *REFUGIUM*

It is the end of the world as we know it. Every beginning is an ending
with a backstory, a right now, the unimaginable, the inevitable, and the
beyond of what might be possible. The ending teaches us where to start.
Reworlding imagines a world that could have been — before colonial
disruption — as our beginning. The film begins with Claire in 2042 at
the age of 68 in an undisclosed bunker attempting to log into the
*Bilya* portal in a futile effort to warn other reworlders about a
raid. 

Claire is the sentinel of the Centre for Reworlding, the last person
standing per se. Everyone has dispersed and she is alone. She descends
into a nihilistic spiral, half-way believing that all efforts at
reworlding were for nothing. ‘We failed’, she says, and attempts to
communicate with those back in 2021 to save themselves and abandon
reworlding and each other. For the sake of future generations, Jen’s
great-granddaughter Ellis in 2121 is tasked with intercepting Claire’s
transmission, and a dialogue ensues. Difficult questions about the
future are answered. *REFUGIUM* becomes a sort of Zoom call of
transtemporal proportions. The audience-listener is witness and becomes
implicated as a collaborator in the project by their presence. Ellis
offers a blueprint for reworlding. There is a provocation, tasks, and
protocols to follow, and everyone has a role.

![A picture containing text, person Description automatically
generated](media/image3.jpeg){width="4.891666666666667in"
height="2.74375in"}

Figure 8.3: Jen Rae and Claire G. Coleman, *REFUGIUM* (2020), digital
still. Photo: Devika Bilamoria. Used with permission.

## Centre for Reworlding — Climate Leadership and Creative + Cultural Resilience

*REFUGIUM*, when created, was intended to be a stand-alone artwork. It
premiered at the *First Assembly of the Centre for Reworlding* at Arts
House in April 2021. In the lead up, we asked and others asked ‘what
would it take to turn this work of speculative fiction into a reality?’
and ‘how can we prepare the world to maintain culture and foster
intergenerational justice in the inevitable apocalypse?’ as the film
imagines. At the *First Assembly,* it became apparent that the Centre
for Reworlding had already begun, albeit different than how it
originates in the film. With support of the original eight reworlders
and the beginnings of our Council of Grandmothers, Mothers, Aunties, and
Sisters, the Centre for Reworlding is forming.

With the support of the Australia Council for the Arts, the Centre for
Reworlding (C∞R) is now a collective of Indigenous, people of colour,
settler, and LGBTIQA2S+ artists, scientists, thinkers, and change-makers
with a track record of collaboratively working at the intersections of
art, disaster risk reduction, and resilience and the climate emergency
leadership. To reworld is to decolonize, Indigenize, and collectively
imagine into action a ‘world worthy of its children’[^13Jenrae_12] for the sake
of all our future ancestors. Through our Creative Resilience Lab,
palavers, events, workshops, and projects, the C∞R aims to bolster
inclusive collaboration and creative leadership in climate emergency
response and action including prioritising the mainstream integration of
arts and culture in national climate emergency discourses, policy
frameworks, and tertiary education.

In Melbourne, our co-curated exhibition the *Centre for Reworlding
presents RESURGENCE*, at Incinerator Art Gallery (June/July 2022)
offered a new provocation in the form of a second collaborative banner
handmade with the assistance of another group of artists in residence at
Commonground, in Seymour, Victoria. Barkandji woman, researcher,
curator, and collaborator Zena Cumpston reminded us that to fast forward
to reworlding means a whole lot of ‘unfucking’ needs to happen, thus the
positioning of unfuck in the *UNFUCK&gt;&gt;REWORLD* (2022) banner that
greeted gallery visitors at the entrance of the exhibition. Visitors
could choose which way to enter the space, to begin with *REFUGIUM* or
to end with it. The exhibition is about truth-telling, future-back
stories and brave unfailing where facts reveal fictions and mnemonics
help you to remember so action and relationships with others embed. It’s
heavy in speculative imagining and offerings to the eye, ears, heart,
and gut.

![A picture containing text Description automatically
generated](media/image4.jpeg){width="4.448611111111111in"
height="2.9833333333333334in"}

Figure 8.4: *UNFUCK&gt;&gt;REWORLD* (2022), Claire G. Coleman, Jen Rae,
Venessa Possum, and

Marcus Syrus Ware, fabric protest banner, Incinerator Art Gallery.
Photo: Lucy Foster. Used with permission.

## Unfucking to Reworld in the Endtimes in the Everywhen

Climate/everything change is upon us.

While it is possible to imagine futures where heroes and technology
‘save us’, where Mars becomes habitable, and underground bunkers become
the norm, the reality is that these visions aren’t going to do the deep
work needed to ensure a liveable future for our future ancestors to
thrive. The elite aren’t making decisions for the commoners, the
preppers aren’t stocking for communities, and the grass is not always
greener on other planets.

Only in togetherness can we unfuck and reworld. We can collectively
destabilize these nihilistic and fundamentalist ambitions and powers by
imagining and acting for futures we want for our young and future
generations. There is not the luxury of time for contemplation. Join us.
Your time begins now in the everywhen.

## Bibliography

Atwood, Margaret. ‘It’s Not Climate Change — It’s Everything Change,’
*Medium*, 27 July 2015,
https://medium.com/matter/it-s-not-climate-change-it-s-everything-change-8fd9aa671804.

Barry, Jennifer. ‘Review: Refuge 2019: Displacement, Arts House (Vic),’
*Arts Hub*, September 3, 2019,
https://www.artshub.com.au/news/reviews/review-refuge-2019-displacement-arts-house-vic-258709-2364400/.

Corntassel, Jeff. ‘Re-Envisioning Resurgence: Indigenous Pathways to
Decolonization and Sustainable Self-Determination,’ *Decolonization:
Indigeneity, Education & Society* 1.1 (2012): 89.

Haraway, Donna. *Staying with the Trouble,* Durham, N.C.: Duke
University Press, 2016.

Kahn, Albert E. and Casals, Pablo. J*oys and Sorrows: Reflections by
Pablo Casals as Told to Albert E. Kahn*, ed. Albert E. Kahn, United
Kingdom: Macdonald and Co. Ltd., 1970,

Kelly, Alex, and Pledger, David. *Assembly for the Future*, (Melbourne:
Arts House, 2020).

Lee, Erica Violet. ‘Reconciling in the Apocalypse,’ *The Monitor*, 1
March 2016,
https://policyalternatives.ca/publications/monitor/reconciling-apocalypse.

McMillan, Alison, March, Alan, and Rae, Jen. *Arts House Listening
Program*, podcast audio, REFUGE: Adaptation 2017,
https://bit.ly/3S3lEBV.

Rae, Jen and Coleman, Claire G.. *Refugium*, 2020. Centre for
Reworlding.

Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty. ‘The Rani of Sirmur: An Essay in Reading
the Archives,’ *History and Theory* 24.3 (1985).

Stanner, William Edward Hanley (ed). *The Dreaming, Reader in
Comparative Religion: An Anthropological Approach*, New York: Harper and
Row, 1972.

Todd, Zoe. ‘Indigenizing the Anthropocene,’ in Heather Davis and Etienne
Turpin (eds), *Art in the Anthropocene: Encounters among Aesthetics,
Politics, Environments and Epistemologies,* London: Open Humanities
Press, 2015.

[^13Jenrae_1]: Jen Rae and Claire G. Coleman, *Refugium,* 2020. Centre for
    Reworlding.

[^13Jenrae_2]: Erica Violet Lee, ‘Reconciling in the Apocalypse,’ *The Monitor*,
    1 March 2016,
    https://policyalternatives.ca/publications/monitor/reconciling-apocalypse.

[^13Jenrae_3]: Donna Haraway, *Staying with the Trouble* (Durham, N.C.: Duke
    University Press, 2016).

[^13Jenrae_4]: Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, "The Rani of Sirmur: An Essay in
    Reading the Archives," *History and Theory* 24, no. 3 (1985).

[^13Jenrae_5]: Zoe Todd, "Indigenizing the Anthropocene," in *Art in the
    Anthropocene: Encounters among Aesthetics, Politics, Environments
    and Epistemologies*, ed. Heather Davis and Etienne Turpin (London:
    Open Humanities Press, 2015).

[^13Jenrae_6]: William Edward Hanley Stanner, ed. *The Dreaming*, Reader in
    Comparative Religion: An Anthropological Approach (New York: Harper
    and Row, 1972).

[^13Jenrae_7]: Alison McMillan, Alan March, and Jen Rae, *Arts House Listening
    Program*, podcast audio, REFUGE: Adaptation 2017,
    https://bit.ly/3S3lEBV.

[^13Jenrae_8]: Jennifer Barry, ‘Review: Refuge 2019: Displacement, Arts House
    (Vic),’ *Arts Hub*, 3 September 2019,
    https://www.artshub.com.au/news/reviews/review-refuge-2019-displacement-arts-house-vic-258709-2364400/.

[^13Jenrae_9]: Margaret Atwood, ‘It’s Not Climate Change — It’s Everything
    Change,’ *Medium,* 27 July 2015,
    https://medium.com/matter/it-s-not-climate-change-it-s-everything-change-8fd9aa671804.

[^13Jenrae_10]: Jeff Corntassel, ‘Re-Envisioning Resurgence: Indigenous Pathways
    to Decolonization and Sustainable Self-Determination,’
    *Decolonization: Indigeneity, Education & Society* 1.1 (2012): 89.

[^13Jenrae_11]: Alex Kelly and David Pledger, "Assembly for the Future,"
    (Melbourne: Arts House, 2020).

[^13Jenrae_12]: Albert E. Kahn and Pablo Casals, *Joys and Sorrows: Reflections
    by Pablo Casals as Told to Albert E. Kahn.*, ed. Albert E. Kahn,
    United Kingdom: Macdonald and Co. Ltd., 1970, 183.
