---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Failure is Inevitable in Care Activism

### Lekshmy Parameswaran

I’m a care activist, designer, and the co-founder of a mission-based
design practice called The Care Lab
(*www.thecarelab.org*[)](http://www.thecarelab.org/). After witnessing
systemic failure in our care systems, structures, and services we set up
The Care Lab. Our intention is to put care back into our systems of care
by designing compassionate, proactive, and equitable experiences for
people. After working internationally for more than two decades to
transform the landscape of care — from social care to healthcare and
education — I have found it to be both a joyous and messy terrain, one
where systemic failures can often coexist alongside incredible humanity
and hope.

In this chapter I explore some of the key crucial intersections between
failure and care that have informed my care activism approach. Through
three case studies I seek to provide critical reflection. Throughout the
chapter I seed key failure provocations as points for critical
reflection for care activists.

*Can our biggest societal failures provoke us to rise up to become our
best selves?*

Our mission as care activists is to design new models of care that shift
the status quo, so by default the work is disruptive. We at The Care Lab
therefore encounter failure on a regular basis and I have many beautiful
scars to prove it. Our approach typically involves layering different
forms of qualitative design research.[^17Lekshmy_1]

We develop participatory methods and tools to help us deeply understand
the experiences and needs of people involved in any given care
experience.[^17Lekshmy_2] This may include frontline care teams, patients, family
caregivers, and their communities, as well as private, public, and
non-profit care provider organizations. Since the work is about systemic
change, we increasingly find ourselves working alongside city councils
and local or national government teams whose decisions shape our
experience of care.

## Systems of Care

Developing new methods and tools to facilitate a creative and
constructive dialogue between providers and receivers of care lies at
the core of our practice and is what drives our design process and
outcomes, be they new services, spaces, programs, and/or tools.[^17Lekshmy_3]

The health and care domain is naturally a risk-sensitive environment
where safety is of utmost priority. Careful ethical, technical, and
clinical protocols and requirements frame our work. The environments in
which care happens — be it nursing homes, hospitals, community centres,
or individual homes — are by default unpredictable and uncertain given
the complex situations, emotions, and processes at play.[^17Lekshmy_4]

For instance, this may include a family grappling day-to-day with a
son’s severe physical and mental disabilities; a community
self-organising to support their vulnerable elders; a social worker
hosting an end-of-life conversation with a resident in denial of their
disease; or an oncologist delivering the news of a terminal cancer to a
patient and his distraught partner. As much as we might carefully plan
our research and design interventions in advance, we always need to be
ready with a Plan B, C, or even D. Our tools must enable us to respond
quickly, flexibly, and tactfully to what is always a dynamic context of
care. Adaptation is not the result of failing to be prepared, but a way
to build resilience and retain agency in the face of change.

We choose to explore some of the most challenging and taboo topics in
care, such as death and dying or severe disability, topics that require
us as professionals to confront our preconceptions and fears and
sensitize ourselves.[^17Lekshmy_5] We must not get in the way of our own
listening, learning, and understanding of others’ pains, fears, and
desires when it comes to their experience of health and care.

As a care activist, I feel a deep responsibility *not* to fail people
who are already being failed by our institutional systems of care. And
yet I know that failures are inevitable when we are trying to change a
complex system. That’s why I always wonder whether instead of trying to
avoid it, we should rather embrace failure through our creative and
transformative practices.

## Failure Can Be a Creative Force

Reflecting on the diverse experiences we have had in different
continents, cultures, communities, and care systems over time, we have
developed specific design research strategies, methods, and tools that
turn a fear of failure into a practical asset. This includes tools to
minimize risks and avoid doing harm during research, techniques to
reframe errors as opportunities to reflect, and methods to deepen
empathy and/or connection.

There is a need to liberate ourselves as care activists from the fear of
failure that can at times prevent us from being as bold in our actions
as we could be.[^17Lekshmy_6] We have created simple but powerful rituals as a
design team for working through such deep-rooted fears; a repository of
methods and tools that help us to fail creatively and with a sense of
confidence. This helps foster an attitude of creative reframing when it
comes to thinking about risks, uncertainties, failures, and the act of
failing itself.

## Towards a Failurists’ Toolkit: Three Projects

As a design practitioner I want to share three project stories with
inherent risks of failure, coupled with three practical and creative
interventions we discovered could help us embrace failure when
conducting sensitive design research or systemic transformation. Even
though these practice rituals are born from our work in the care space,
you might consider them relevant for any work that strives to unpack a
complex and sensitive topic or tries to achieve greater, more systemic
impact. Take them as inspiration and starting point. There are surely
many more practices and techniques possible to play with failure in a
similar way.

*What are you most fearful about within a current research topic and how
does this affect your approach to the work?*

## Failurist Practice 1: Empty Your Backpack // Self-awareness and Sensitization

**Project:** *Hospitable Hospice*, Singapore, 2013. In partnership with
the Lien Foundation, Ang Chin Moh Foundation, Dover Park Hospice, Assisi
Hospice, and St Joseph’s Nursing Home and Hospice.[^17Lekshmy_7]

**Intention:** To reimagine the end-of-life experience of in-patient
hospices in order to celebrate life at the end of life.

**Potential Risk:** Not being able to listen fully and deeply to people
due to our personal fears and misconceptions of death and dying.

**Practice Story:** We came together as a team at the start of the
project to understand the human experience of death and dying. It was
the first time we had deep dived into this topic, despite it having been
in the background of much of our work in health and care. Reflecting
upon our individual fears and hopes related to death, we wrote them down
on pieces of paper or chose specific objects to represent them. Taking
turns, we expressed our fears to one another and placed the paper or
object into the box. We saw we had similar fears and were not alone, but
we also saw how we could better support one another, as sharing our
vulnerabilities made us stronger as a team, and therefore be better
prepared to enter this confronting topic and uncertain territory.

At the end of the session, we closed the box with a collective intention
to place our own preconceptions and hopes to one side and make space in
which to deeply listen to the stories of patients, families, and
professional caregivers facing end-of-life. We also found a vocabulary
amongst ourselves, and new ways to open a conversation around death and
dying that we could then apply in our research with terminal patients
and their loved ones.

![](media/image1.jpeg){width="4.724409448818897in"
height="3.247353455818023in"}

Figure 12.1: Empty Your Backpack: A conversation toolkit to open up and
reflect upon end-of-life fears, hopes, and preconceptions. Image credit:
The Care Lab.

*What Red Flags (warning signs) do you see on your project horizon and
how could you prepare to navigate them?*

## Failurist Practice 2 : Red Flag Protocol // A Partnership Practice for Transformation Projects

**Project**: *Care Beyond Walls*, Singapore, 2021-ongoing. In
partnership with the Lien Foundation, AWWA Health & Senior Care,
Trisector Associates, and IELO Architects.

**Intention:** To demonstrate a new community-based model of dementia
care that creates the conditions for persons with dementia and their
caregivers to thrive within their neighbourhood.

**Potential Risk:** To overly focus on the bold, aspirational goals of
the project and neglect to monitor the multiple and messy factors that
are difficult to control but that can be crucial for project impact.

**Practice Story**: The kick-off of any new partnership project tends to
focus on creating a positive vibe amongst everyone convened and a recap
of the group’s shared objectives. But when the work involves
implementing a new model of care in a sector where standards of care
have been well established and deeply embedded for decades, there is a
need to acknowledge the very real risks and pain that might be felt in
any process of transformation.

So aside from asking everyone’s expectations and personal motivations
for the project, people shared the risks they saw and the potential
failures we may face along the way. These were captured alongside the
hopes and without judgement or shame. We created the idea of a Red Flag
Protocol that would support a team ritual of reflecting on risks at key
moments in the project, and gave permission for any partner to raise a
Red Flag, so that it could be discussed collectively and either
mitigated or used to better prepare us to navigate the uncertainty.

![](media/image2.jpg){width="5.47244094488189in"
height="5.964035433070866in"}

Figure 12.2: Care Beyond Walls Kick off Meeting Space: Online space
where the project partners can safely share expectations as well as
identify and discuss potential risks and failures of the project. Image
credit: The Care Lab.

*What levels of zoom (into lived experience) might you need to
confidently play inside your research landscape?*

## Failurist Practice 3: Combining Levels of Zoom // A Layered Research Strategy

**Project**: *Who Cares? Singapore,* 2016. In collaboration with NCSS
(National Council of Social Services).[^17Lekshmy_8]

**Intention**: To uplift and support the role of the family caregiver
and transform the experience of caregiving.

**Potential Risk:** The caregiver is often an invisible ‘red thread’
connecting disparate services across the health and social care
landscape. Understanding their needs and challenges means understanding
this complex landscape at multiple levels simultaneously including
policy, system infrastructure, and service touchpoints as well as
community and family-based lived experiences. The danger lies in missing
a crucial piece of this vast and detailed picture and thereby failing to
find the most significant opportunities to provide support to and serve
the needs of caregivers.

**Practice Story**: It was important to work at different scales of
insight for such a transformation project. We created a Landscape Map
(Figure 12.3) that acted as a visual framework with which we could see
the caregiving journey across various silos and sectors, placing key
service providers and resources into the picture. This helped us to have
a panoramic-level of zoom and to identify where the systemic gaps in
caregiver support were. Video ethnography (Figure 12.3) was then used as
the most intimate, eye-level of zoom to reveal gaps in supporting lived
experiences.[^17Lekshmy_9] We spent hours accompanying and getting to know ten
different families each struggling with complex caregiving situations,
creating a set of films documenting and revealing the seven emotions of
caregiving.

These lived experiences revealed the impact that the overarching system
of policies, structures, and services were having on caregivers’ quality
of their life. A research toolkit that enabled us to achieve different
levels of zoom helped to hold the bigger picture in mind, even whilst
empathising at the most fundamental human level; it held the
complexities and uncertainties, whilst also giving us room to reflect,
explore, play, co-create, iterate, and design with the confidence that
we could thereby define a more holistic and complete ecosystem of new
support solutions and strategies.

![](media/image3.png){width="6.696667760279965in"
height="6.310001093613298in"}

Figure 12.3: Landscape Map and movie still (side by side).

## 

## Failure Can Build Our Capacity to Drive Change: Personal Reflections

I have provided three projects in which care and failure have been part
of the critical making and reflection. As I have suggested, while
practitioners might be learning to be more comfortable (and less
fearful) around failure and failing, knowing its power to drive
creativity, this approach seeds a series of further provocations.

How do we convince communities, organizations, and funders to commit
time, money, and effort towards a cause?

How do we demonstrate that it is possible to reimagine new systems of
care by offering a process of social innovation and a toolkit of design
research practices that can be trusted to navigate risks and
complexities and facilitate the creativity needed to achieve social
impact?

How do we apply such practices to empower ourselves, our teams, and our
partners to see failure as natural consequence of such structural
transformation, and yet also build the confidence and spirit to work
productively and playfully in spite of the risk of failure and the
consequences of failing?

As a practitioner and care activist I believe that if we can answer some
of these questions related to failure, we may discover more effective
ways to spread and scale new models of care, and thereby help to drive
forward a social movement to transform care.

Our systems of care are broken, it *will* take courage to redesign them.

On a more personal note, I think it is important to stay awake to the
fact that you can still fail even after working for decades in a
specific area or topic. In fact, experience can make you confident to be
bolder, to risk failing more spectacularly in order to achieve a greater
impact. But it can also make you complacent and less exploratory or
playful, relying on past deep experience. So, I feel that by learning to
acknowledge and work constructively with failure, you can ensure that
you stay humble and yet always open to learn and grow.

So, wear your scars with pride.

## Bibliography

Aralas, Dalia. ‘Extending Video Ethnographic Approaches’, in
*Methodological Developments in Ethnography*, Bingley: Emerald Group
Publishing Limited, 2007.

Coughlin, Sheryl, Roberts, David, O’Neill, Kenneth, and Brooks, Peter.
‘Looking to Tomorrow’s Healthcare Today: A Participatory Health
Perspective.*’ Internal Medicine Journal*, 48.1 (2018): 92-96.

Delbrassine, Nathalie, Dia, Oscar, and Escarrabill, Joan. *The Patient’s
Perspective in the Health Care System. Shared Patient Experience*.
Brussels: SPX, 2020,
https://spexperience.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/SPXPositionPaper\_EN.pdf

Haian, Xue, and Desmet, Pieter M.A. ‘Researcher Introspection for
Experience-Driven Design Research’, *Design Studies* 63 (2019): 37-64.

Heller, Steven. *Design Disasters: Great Designers, Fabulous Failure,
and Lessons Learned*, New York: Simon and Schuster, 2008.

*Hospitable Hospice. Redesigning Care for Tomorrow*, Fuelfor, Lien
Foundation and ACM Foundation, 2013,
https://www.thecarelab.org/hospitablehospice

Lunenfeld, Peter. *Design Research: Methods and Perspectives*,
Cambridge: MIT Press, 2003.

Raisio, Harri, Puustinen, Alisa, and Vartiainen, Pirkko. ‘The Concept of
Wicked Problems: Improving the Understanding of Managing Problem
Wickedness in Health and Social Care’, in Will Thomas, Anneli Hujala,
Sanna Laulainen, Robert McMurray (eds) *The Management Of Wicked
Problems In Health And Social Care,* London: Routledge, 2018, pp. 3-20.

Sanders, Liz, and Simons, George. ‘A Social Vision For Value Co-Creation
In Design’, *Open Source Business Resource*, (December 2009): 27-34.

Vishnu, Renjith. Renjulal Yesodharan, Judith A. Noronha, Elissa Ladd,
and Anice George, ‘Qualitative Methods in Health Care Research,’
*International Journal of Preventive Medicine* 12 (2021).

*Who Cares? Transforming The Caregiving Experience in Singapore.*
National Council of Social Service and fuelfor, 2016,
https://www.thecarelab.org/whocares

[^17Lekshmy_1]: Peter Lunenfeld, *Design Research: Methods and Perspectives*,
    Cambridge: MIT Press, 2003.

[^17Lekshmy_2]: Much of our methodology is informed by the interdisciplinary
    approaches across health, care, and design. Some key relevant texts
    include:, Renjith Vishnu, Renjulal Yesodharan, Judith A. Noronha,
    Elissa Ladd, and Anice George, ‘Qualitative Methods in Health Care
    Research,’ *International Journal of Preventive Medicine* 12 (2021);
    Sheryl Coughlin, David. Roberts, Kenneth O’Neill and Peter Brooks,
    ‘Looking to Tomorrow’s Healthcare Today: A Participatory Health
    Perspective.’ *Internal Medicine Journal*, 48.1 (2018): 92-96;
    Nathalie Delbrassine, Oscar Dia and Joan Escarrabill, *The Patient’s
    Perspective in the Health Care System*. *Shared Patient Experience*.
    Brussels: SPX; 2020,
    https://spexperience.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/SPXPositionPaper\_EN.pdf.

[^17Lekshmy_3]: Liz Sanders, and George Simons, ‘A Social Vision For Value
    Co-Creation In Design’, *Open Source Business Resource,* (December
    2009): 27-34.

[^17Lekshmy_4]: Harri Raisio, Alisa Puustinen, and Pirkko Vartiainen, ‘The Concept
    of Wicked Problems: Improving the Understanding of Managing Problem
    Wickedness in Health and Social Care’, in Will Thomas, Anneli
    Hujala, Sanna Laulainen, Robert McMurray (eds) *The Management Of
    Wicked Problems In Health And Social Care*, London: Routledge, 2018,
    pp. 3-20.

[^17Lekshmy_5]: Xue Haian, and Pieter MA Desmet, ‘Researcher Introspection for
    Experience-Driven Design Research’, *Design Studies* 63 (2019):
    37-64.

[^17Lekshmy_6]: Steven Heller, *Design Disasters: Great Designers, Fabulous
    Failure, and Lessons Learned,* New York: Simon and Schuster, 2008.

[^17Lekshmy_7]: *Hospitable Hospice. Redesigning Care for Tomorrow*, Fuelfor, Lien
    Foundation and ACM Foundation, 2013,
    <https://www.thecarelab.org/hospitablehospice>.

[^17Lekshmy_8]: *Who Cares? Transforming The Caregiving Experience in Singapore.*
    National Council of Social Service and fuelfor, 2016,
    <https://www.thecarelab.org/whocares>.

[^17Lekshmy_9]: Dalia Aralas, ‘Extending Video Ethnographic Approaches’, in
    *Methodological Developments in Ethnography* Bingley: Emerald Group
    Publishing Limited, 2007.
