---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Coloring in the Void: On Absurdity, Falling, Failing, and Contemporary Art

### Chantal Faust

*Boo Boo Bird* is a song, or a poem perhaps, or a song and a poem, by
the Scottish poet, songwriter and humorist Ivor Cutler. This wistful
ballad describes the plight and flight of a mythical bird, the Boo Boo
bird. What we discover through the song is that the Boo Boo bird has no
defining features, in fact — it has no features at all. The Boo Boo bird
is invisible and recognized only by its call: ‘boo boo, boo boo’. The
repetition of the word is important, and the absurdity of the invisible
bird is amplified by its childish double name; boo boo, like an infant’s
first attempts at vocalization, or that informal way of referring to a
failure, a mistake, a booboo. There is something haunting about the way
Cutler sings to this impossible creature and it is this element which
makes the work so compelling; that it can be simultaneously ridiculous
and also very moving.[^23Chantal_1] It straddles a certain border between irony
and sincerity. And it is this border, or rather the oscillation between
the states of irony and sincerity and between falling and failing, that
features in the works discussed within this chapter, tracing a line
between things and what is at the outermost edge of things, namely, the
void.

> The unlimited begins on the external border of the limit: and it does
> nothing but begin, never to finish.[^23Chantal_2]

This essay revolves around the expression of a thought, an idea that
revolves around certain concepts within the philosophy of the absurd,
drawn from the writings of Albert Camus. It also revolves around a
selection of durational performance works, made between the 1970s and
today. These examples have been selected as a way to help think through
a questioning of failure within contemporary art and to offer a
consideration of a new kind of absurdist tendency that might be
emerging, or perhaps it is re-emerging. This ‘re-’ as a prefix suggests
once more, and again, and as an image; from Sisyphus rolling his
boulder, to Bruce Nauman walking around his studio,[^23Chantal_3] and onwards. The
repeated gesture will be a reoccurring element in this chapter.
Repetition, it seems, opens up a way of thinking about, and
re-presenting, the *failuristic* tendencies that abound in absurdity.

> I was already feeling uneasy. All at once, the silence stopped
> breathing.[^23Chantal_4]

\_/\_/\_/

The word ‘want’ stems from *vanta*, an Old Norse verb that means ‘to be
lacking’. We want something that we feel we are missing. Immediate
pleasures in some cases, ambitious prospects in others, and unattainable
fantasies for many. All contain within them something of a hope, a
vision of a possible future that we might like to enjoy or visit or come
home to. But from the want of a bar of chocolate, to wanting to spend
time in the studio, to wanting to be happy, attractive, caring, or
powerful, to even wanting to be wanted: there is something else that we
would need to want above all of these desires, for without it, they are
nothing. All of these desires are based on life. We need to want to
live.

And yet, we must live knowing that at some time we will no longer be
living. The journey between birth and death will have been our life and
all our other hopes and wants are measured against this end bracket that
is undefined yet indisputable. When reminded of this issue of time and
finitude, certain desires can be put into perspective against our own
life spans and against the historical backdrop of so many brackets that
have opened and closed before us and before them. If we choose to really
think about the details of our lives, the wants and needs that occupy
our thoughts and determine how we choose to fill the hours of each day,
and if we choose to think about these as tiny flecks of molecules
floating in an ever-expanding universe, many things that have so much
meaning for us can suddenly appear a little strange and insignificant.
Meaningless. For Albert Camus, it here at this moment of conscious
awakening, in this act of looking in and asking ‘why’, that absurdity is
first recognized:

> It happens that the stage-sets collapse. Rising, tram, four hours in
> the office or factory, meal, tram, four hours of work, meal, sleep and
> Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, and Saturday, according
> to the same rhythm — this path is easily followed most of the time.
> But one day the ‘why’ arises and everything begins in that weariness
> tinged with amazement. ‘Begins’ — this is important. Weariness comes
> at the end of the acts of a mechanical life, but at the same time it
> inaugurates the impulse of consciousness. It awakens consciousness and
> provokes what follows.[^23Chantal_5]

And if and when the stage set collapses, and we are asking *why* and
choosing to consciously face the absurdity and meaningless of existence,
one might wonder: is there anything we can do but weep? The Dutch
conceptual artist Bas Jan Ader cries silently and alone. *Too Sad to
Tell You* is the handwritten note that introduces this short 16mm film
shot in 1971. He just weeps and weeps — we do not know why. Endless
crying on infinite replay. Why is it that such prolonged gestures,
repetition stretched out to looped eternity, can cause us to question
the very nature and entrapment of gesture itself?

There he is now swinging from a tree, arms stretched to the point where
it is a matter of the inevitable ‘when’ he is going to splash into the
river below. Off he goes on his bike headed straight for the canal.
Watch as he falls off his chair that is precariously balanced on the
peak of a roof and is soon to come crashing to the ground. These are
choreographed falls, we know from the films’ titles what to expect. As
soon as the artist has fallen, the clips end. When asked why he made
these works, Ader’s response was that he was overpowered by gravity. As
with life, falling too involves a beginning and an end. Ader’s falling
works are set up to fall, to fail, and to fall again. Of course, this
ongoing repetition of a task that is inevitably doomed to fail and is
performed over and over and over again could also describe the famous
punishment of King Sisyphus, who according to Greek mythology, was
condemned to roll a giant boulder up a mountain, only to have the rock
roll back down again every time he reached the top, and to repeat this
act for eternity.

For Camus, Sisyphus offers an archetypal portrait of the absurd hero.
What particularly interested Camus was that moment when Sisyphus is
watching the boulder rush down the hill. As he heads down the mountain,
briefly free from his labor, he is conscious and aware of the absurdity
of his fate:

> The struggle itself towards the heights is enough to fill a man’s
> heart. One must imagine Sisyphus happy.[^23Chantal_6]

This figure of Sisyphus, sentenced to toil for no reason and towards
nothing, as a metaphor for the human condition has been echoed in
artworks and continues to do so in various guises: from Marina
Abramović’s 1975 black and white video *Art Must Be Beautiful / Artist
Must Be Beautiful,* through to Francis Alÿs’s 1997 durational
performance *Paradox of Praxis 1 (Sometimes Making Something Leads to
Nothing*)*,* to Rebecca Moss’s *Frog* from 2016, which sees the artist
adorned in a frog suit and jumping on a lurid green pogo stick,
desperately trying to remain upright as she boings, slips, and splats
across a large puddle in the English countryside.

In the iconic *Exergie — Butter Dance* work by the Indonesian
performance artist Melati Suryodarmo, the artist walks into a dark
gallery towards a carpet of butter block bricks gleaming treacherously
under a spotlight. Standing with her back towards the audience, she then
turns dramatically to the front and begins stepping on top of the
butter. As she performs her dance to the audience, the butter melts and
spreads below her scrambling, high-heeled feet. The moment of inevitable
crash is spectacular and violent. It certainly must have been painful,
yet up she gets, again and again. Drawing on her experience of training
in Butoh dance, Suryodarmo has described the work as a short kind of
‘haiku’, a poetic action with only three basic movements: dancing on the
butter and standing up, with the fall happening somewhere in between.

It is an intensely powerful — and painful — performance, one which seems
to encapsulate what it means to be a woman, an artist, or simply a
person in the world today. The choice of butter as a material was a
comment on the artist’s relocation from her homeland of Indonesia to
Germany. Suryodarmo has said that she both loves and hates butter at the
same time. It is not something that is commonly consumed in Indonesia
and it has changed her body since arriving in Europe, in that she
developed a hypothyroid condition that became active at the time of her
moving across the world. The butter thus represents the cultural
confrontation she is experiencing, on the one side adjusting into the
culture she is living in and on the other side experiencing a number of
rejections; in this case, an apparent bodily rejection to this foreign
substance. In a comment that seems to be highly related to the idea of
Sisyphus as proposed by Camus, Suryodarmo notes that in the piece, she
was seduced to enter a particular time, an instance where her body
related with a very specific delicate moment — that of the instant just
before falling down. She says: ‘in that moment all my consciousness
controls my body, but at the same time the risk becomes unpredictable. I
might lose control, but the will to get up again is more important to
me’.[^23Chantal_7]

We could certainly these rather nihilistic approaches: performances that
perform the undoing of meaning demonstrate a sense of futility. The
point is pointlessness, yet pointlessness is still a point. It could
even be said to have become an unthinking style. But how else can the
absurd be represented? Camus’ *The Myth of Sisyphus* contains a chapter
specifically on the absurd creator or artist. Art is an expression of
freedom, according to Camus, because it highlights and helps relate the
meaningless of existence. It is an absurd act of rebellion, and it
offers no answers to the absurdity of life:

> Art can never be so well served as by a negative thought. Its dark and
> humiliated proceedings are as necessary to the understanding of a
> great work as black is to white. To work and create ‘for nothing’, to
> sculpture in clay, to know that one’s creation has no future, to see
> one’s work destroyed in a day while being aware that, fundamentally,
> this has no more importance than building for centuries — this is the
> difficult wisdom that absurd thought sanctions. Performing these two
> tasks simultaneously, negating on the one hand and magnifying on the
> other, is the way open to the absurd creator. T\[he\]y must give the
> void its colours. [^23Chantal_8]

Give the void it colors. It’s quite a beautiful notion. One that
exemplifies Camus’ stance that we must not have hope, yet we cannot
anguish over the hopelessness of it all. We should live without appeal,
he says. But how is it possible to color in the void? How do we color in
a lack, openness, a vacuum? How do we color in the endless and
unknowable expanse of empty space that lies beyond the outline of our
own limitations? Camus was careful to be very clear that he certainly
was not suggesting that art should become a sterile illustration of
absurd notions. However, he did believe that if we are to accept
absurdity in the rea l world, then it must not be denied in an artist’s
fictional world. For the absurd artist:

> it is not a matter of explaining and solving, but of experiencing and
> describing.[^23Chantal_9]

The Icelandic artist Ragnar Kjartansson often features in his own work,
but for the durational performance piece *A Lot of Sorrow,* it is the
band The National who take centre stage. For this event, Kjartansson
invited the band to play their three- minute song titled *Sorrow*
repeatedly for six hours as part of MoMA PS1’s Sunday Sessions in 2013.
The lyrics, which begin with ‘*Sorrow found me when I was young / Sorrow
waited, sorrow won*’, speak to the yearnings of unrequited love, of
‘*not wanting to get over you’* and endless, unsatisfied desire and
waiting. Playing such songs on repeat, over and over again, at the end
of a relationship or just for the thought of wanting more, is not such
an unusual occurrence. But staging it so the actual band is playing the
song for you over and over on repeat causes something quite different to
happen.

*‘I don’t want to get over you*’, the ultimate refrain of the song,
speaks to exactly what this act of musical endurance is about. It is
like an extended moment of heart bleed. ‘*I don’t want to get over
you*’. But it’s not quite a perfect act of repetition, is it? We watch
the band, The National, in all their human and physical and vulnerable
forms become tired and sweaty and perhaps even start to go out of their
minds at the task. And then finally, hours in and towards the end,
something seems to change, even within this act of monotonous
repetition. The performers become reinvigorated. They feed off the
audience, the audience who have mostly stayed and endured this
durational performance with the band. It’s the audience who sing most of
the final song. *The one and only encore.* Within this endless loop, we
still see some kind of arc. From initial readiness for the task, to
exhaustion, breathlessness, and bewilderment, to some kind of communal
elation at having achieved something, something quite absurd, together.
Meaning is made, broken, and remade through the repetition. And perhaps,
not surprisingly, this leads us back to Camus and that certain type of
conscious awakening that he describes in *The Myth of Sisyphus*.

\_/\_/\_/

The choice to stop wanting does not lie in a magic potion, in willpower,
or even in refusing the world of the living. To stop wanting, we must
fail at believing in wanting. An awareness of the absurdity of a system
of seeking value in horizons that are continually shifting inside out
does not negate the idea of values themselves. For Camus, the value lies
in our individual freedom, passion, and revolt. To stop wanting is to
recognize the character of Sisyphus within ourselves. But again, if we
are able to choose to fail at wanting, this will not necessarily result
in despair. To recognize absurdity, to see such *failurism*, is to call
present reality into question. The embodiment of absurdity continues to
be called upon by artists and writers as a response to global anxiety,
inanity, and horror. As Jennifer Higgie states, ‘absurdity is both a
challenge to convention and a reflection of what it is to be human: has
anyone ever lived a truly rational life? How could we, on such a messy
planet? And *why* should we?’[^23Chantal_10]

Remember Camus’ words: one must imagine Sisyphus happy. Art is seen as a
means to support and sustain a lucid consciousness in the face of
absurdity and of failure. *What appears absurd to us today calls our
present reality into question — provided we see something as absurd at
all.* To be absurd is to be out of tune, the etymological roots of the
word tell us this. Out of tune, and therefore irrational. Failing to
follow the right footsteps, falling, and flailing in the act. In a world
that increasingly feels out of tune, it is possible that what we might
have previously associated with absurdity is no longer absurd at all. It
could be that absurdity-as-failure is invisible, like the Boo Boo bird.
Or perhaps it is constantly shifting in form. And it needs to do this.
Let’s not forget that when Donald Trump made plans to buy Greenland in
2018, of all the insults he received, the one that irked him the most
was when the Danish Prime Minister, Mette Frederiksen, called his idea
absurd. Absurdity retains its power still. Do (not) fail to use it
wisely.

## Bibliography

Camus, Albert. *The Myth of Sisyphus*, trans. Justin O’Brien,
Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1977, 19.

Higgie, Jennifer, Faust, Chantal, Pandhal, Hardeep, and Williams,
Bedwyr. ‘Talk: Absurd Cosmos,’ *Goldsmiths CCA*,
<https://goldsmithscca.art/channel/absurd-cosmos/>.

Nancy, Jean-Luc. ‘The Sublime Offering,’ in Simon Sparks (ed), *A Finite
Thinking*, Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2003, 223.

Nauman, Bruce. *Walking in an Exaggerated Manner Around the Perimeter of
a Square* (1968).

Pessoa, Fernando. *The Book of Disquiet*, ed. Richard Zenith, London:
Penguin, 2002, 355.

Suryodarmo, Melati. *EXERGIE – butter dance* (2000),
<https://www.melatisuryodarmo.com/works_Exergie_Butter_Dance.html>.

[^23Chantal_1]: With thanks to Sarah Jones for the reference.

[^23Chantal_2]: Jean-Luc Nancy, ‘The Sublime Offering,’ in Simon Sparks (ed), *A
    Finite Thinking*, Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2003, 223.

[^23Chantal_3]: *Walking in an Exaggerated Manner Around the Perimeter of a
    Square* (dir. Bruce Nauman, 1968).

[^23Chantal_4]: Fernando Pessoa, *The Book of Disquiet*, ed. Richard Zenith,
    London: Penguin, 2002, 355.

[^23Chantal_5]: Albert Camus, *The Myth of Sisyphus*, trans. Justin O’Brien,
    Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1977, 19.

[^23Chantal_6]: Camus, *The Myth of Sisyphus*, 111.

[^23Chantal_7]: *EXERGIE – butter dance* (dir. Melati Suryodarmo, 2000),
    <https://www.melatisuryodarmo.com/works_Exergie_Butter_Dance.html>.

[^23Chantal_8]: Camus, *The Myth of Sisyphus*, 103.

[^23Chantal_9]: Camus, *The Myth of Sisyphus*, 87.

[^23Chantal_10]: Jennifer Higgie, Chantal Faust, Hardeep Pandhal, and Bedwyr
    Williams, ‘Talk: Absurd Cosmos,’ *Goldsmiths CCA*,
    <https://goldsmithscca.art/channel/absurd-cosmos/>.
