---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Biographies

## Editors:

**Sybille Lammes** is Professor of New Media and Digital Culture at The
Centre for the Arts in Society (LUCAS) at Leiden University. She has
been a visiting Senior Research Fellow at The University of Manchester,
and has worked as a researcher at the Centre for Interdisciplinary
Methodologies at the University of Warwick, as well as the media-studies
departments of Utrecht University and the University of Amsterdam. Her
background is in media-studies and play-studies, which she has always
approached from an interdisciplinary angle, including playful and
creative methods in mapping and media practices. She is co-editor of
*Playful Identities* (2015), *Time for Mapping* (2018), *The Routledge
Handbook of Interdisciplinary Research Methods* (2018), and *The Playful
Citizen* (2019). She is an ERC laureate and has been the partner
investigator of numerous research projects.

**Kat Jungnickel** is a reader in sociology, director of Methods Lab and
PI of the European Research Council funded *Politics of Patents* (POP)
project at Goldsmiths, University of London. Together with her team of
sewing social scientists she is researching, reconstructing, and
reimagining 200 years of clothing inventions from global patent
archives. Recent publications include *Transmissions: critical tactics
for making and communicating research* (2020), *Creative Practice
Ethnographies* (with Hjorth, Harris & Coombs, 2020) and *Bikes and
Bloomers: Victorian Women Inventors and their Extraordinary Cycle
Wear* (2018).

**Larissa Hjorth** is a Distinguished Professor, creative practitioner,
digital ethnographer, and Australian Research Council Future Fellow at
RMIT University. Hjorth has two decades experience working in
cross-cultural, interdisciplinary, collaborative projects exploring the
social life (death and afterlife) of mobile media. Since 2000, Hjorth
has been researching the socio-cultural dimensions of mobile media in
the Asia–Pacific. Hjorth has published over 100 publications on the
topic – recent publications include *Haunting Hands* (with Cumiskey,
2017), *Understanding Social Media* (with Hinton, 2nd Edition, 2019),
*Creative Practice Ethnographies* (with Harris, Jungnickel, & Coombs,
2020), *Digital Media Practices in Households* (et al., 2020) and
*Ambient Play* (with Richardson, 2020).

**Jen Rae** (www.jenraeis.com) is an award-winning artist-researcher of
Canadian Métis-Scottish descent living on unceded Djaara Country in
Australia. Her practice-led research expertise is in the discursive
field of contemporary environmental art and arts-based environmental
communication. Her work is engaged in discourses around the climate
emergency, disaster risk reduction and resilience, and speculative
futures predominantly articulated through transdisciplinary
collaborative methodologies and community alliances. Jen creates and
contributes to experimental multi-platform collaborative projects,
including being a core artist of Arts House’s multi-year REFUGE project
(2016-current), where artists, emergency service providers, and
communities work together to rehearse climate related emergencies and
explore the impact of creativity in disaster preparedness. Jen leads
creative research activities at the Centre for Reworlding.

## Contributors:

**Claire G. Coleman** is a Noongar woman whose ancestral country is on
the south coast of Western Australia; she was born in Boorloo (Perth)
and is currently based in Naarm (Melbourne, Australia). Her debut novel
*Terra Nullius* (2017), published in Australia and in the US, won a
Norma K. Hemming Award and was shortlisted for the Stella Prize and an
Aurealis Award. Her second novel is *The Old Lie* (2019), followed by
*Lies, Damn Lies* (2021), which both unpack the damages of colonization,
and her new book *Enclave* was released in July 2022. Her essays,
poetry, short fiction, and art criticism has been published in *The
Saturday Paper*, *The Guardian*, *Spectrum*, *Meanjin*, *Griffith
Review*, and many others. Claire is the lead writer at the Centre for
Reworlding.

**Linda Dement** has worked in arts computing since the late 1980s.
Originally a photographer, her digital practice spans the programmed,
performative, and virtual. With a longstanding interest in bodies and
technologies, she deals with issues of disturbance, commingling
corporeality with the digital and electronic, and giving form to the
difficult territory of the unbearable and conflicted. Her work has been
widely exhibited, including at the ICA London, Ars Electronica,
International Symposia of Electronic Art, Impakt Media Arts and
Transmediale events, and is in collections such as the Bibliotèque
Nationale de France, ArtBank, Australian Video Art Archive, New York
Filmmakers Co-op, SIGGRAPH Archive, and the Daniel Langlois Foundation.

**Chantal Faust** is an artist, writer, Professor of Contemporary Art
and Head of Contemporary Art Practice at the Royal College of Art,
London. Faust has led research groups and conferences on absurdity,
haptic aesthetics, and the urgency of the arts. Her research interests
primarily focus on the scanner as a conduit for the study of
visualizations of touch, immediacy, and blatancy, extending into a
practice of works in video, performance, photography, and painting.
Recent exhibitions include *There Is A Hole In The Bagel*, Gallery TOM,
Tokyo (2019) and *Solitary Pleasures*, Freud Museum, London (2018).
Faust’s writing has been published widely in catalogues and journals
with book chapters including ‘The Masochistic Pulse’ in *Dark Habits*
(2017), and ‘Thinking Through Outline’ in *Anchor* (2015). Faust’s
monograph *Pleasure Machines: Towards a Philosophy of Scanning* is
forthcoming.

**Emma Fraser** is Lecturer in New Media and Media Studies at Berkeley
Centre for New Media. Emma’s research focuses on digital video games,
media cultures, and representations of the city, including digital space
and place, the imagined ruins of video games, and post-apocalyptic
visions of the end of the city. She also researches urban decay and
regeneration, using Frankfurt School critical theory to critique city
branding and urban exploration practices, and the role of play and media
in urban experience.

**Anna Hickey-Moody** is Professor of Media and Communication at RMIT
University in Naarm/ Melbourne, Australia. She also holds a visiting
professorship in Sociology at Goldsmiths, London where she previously
led the Centre for the Arts and Learning in Education and launched the
art practice-based PhD in Arts and Learning. Anna has been the recipient
of an Australian Research Council (ARC) Future Fellowship, and an RMIT
Vice Chancellor’s Senior Research Fellowship, a Monash University
post-doctoral fellowship, and she currently leads an interdisciplinary
team of researchers in the ARC funded Vital Arts: Skilling Young People
for Their Futures project. Trained as a social anthropologist and
performing artist, Anna has worked across dance, theatre, and the visual
arts with a focus on youth, intersectionality, and disability. She has
held visiting positions at Columbia University, Manchester Metropolitan
University, and UCL. Her books include *Faith Stories: Sustaining
Meaning in Troubling Times* (2023), *Childhood, Citizenship and the
Anthropocene* (2021), and *Deleuze and Masculinity* (2019). Anna is
presently writing a book about decolonial politics in children’s art
under contract with Amsterdam University Press.

**Sam Hind** is Lecturer in Digital Media and Culture at the University
of Manchester. His research interests include navigational technologies,
sensing and the sensor society, algorithmic decision-making, and
automotive cultures. He is co-editor of *Interrogating Datafication:
Towards a Praxeology of Data* (2022) and *Time for Mapping: Cartographic
Temporalities* (2018), as well as co-author of *Playful Mapping in the
Digital Age* (2016). He completed his PhD on protest mapping at the
University of Warwick, and previously worked in SFB1187 Media of
Cooperation, at the University of Siegen, Germany. Since 2017 his
research has focused on the design, development, and testing of
autonomous vehicles.

**Kelly Hussey-Smith** is a lecturer in the photography program in the
School of Art at RMIT University. Her research explores the intersection
of documentary, social practice, and public pedagogy with a focus on
community partnerships. She currently co-leads the Social Practice and
Art and Education themes of the Contemporary Art and Social
Transformation Research Group (CAST) in the RMIT School of Art. Her most
recent work looks at the challenges of teaching collaboration in
tertiary institutions, and artist-led approaches to public pedagogy in
the Asia Pacific region.

**Li Jönsson** is Associate Senior Lecturer in Design Theory and
Practice at Malmö University. She works in the field of STS and
experimental practice-led design research. Her interest in speculative,
participatory, and inventive methods focuses on socio-ecological
transformation. Recent publications include *Narrating Ecological Grief
and Hope Through Reproduction and Translations* (with Lindström, 2022)
and *Sketching Hope and Grief in Transition: Situating Anticipation in
Lived Futures* (with Lindström & Hillgren, 2022).

**Kristina Lindström** is a Senior Lecturer in Design at the School of
Arts and Communication at Malmö University. Her research spans across
participatory and speculative design and feminist technoscience, with a
focus on public engagement. She is one of the founders of the Un/Making
Studio that explores alternatives to progressivist and anthropocentric
ways of thinking and making within design. Her most recent work concerns
hope and grief in transition to post-carbon futures.

**Olivia Khoo** is Associate Professor in Film and Screen Studies at
Monash University. She is the author of *The Chinese Exotic: Modern
Diasporic Femininity* (2007), and co-author (with Belinda Smaill &
Audrey Yue) of *Transnational Australian Cinema: Ethics in the Asian
Diasporas* (2013).

**Annette N. Markham** is Professor and Co-director of the Digital
Ethnography Research Centre at RMIT University, Melbourne. She is
internationally recognized for developing innovative epistemological
frameworks for rethinking ethics and methods for grappling with complex
social contexts. A pioneering member of the internet research community,
Annette studies how identity, relationships, and cultural formations are
constructed in and influenced by digitally saturated socio-technical
contexts.

**Nancy Mauro-Flude** is a performance artist and theorist. Her artistic
research is driven by the demystification of technology and the
‘mystification’ that lies in and through the performance of the machinic
assemblage. She currently leads the Computational Poetics and
Choreography studio at RMIT University and is guest editor of Runway
Journal, an independent peer-reviewed journal for contemporary art
(Sydney). Her recent essays include *Computabilities Dancing* (2023), *A
Feminist Server Stack* (2022); *Writing the Feminist Internet* (2021),
and *Performing with the Aether* (2019). Her work has been exhibited at
ACCA Melbourne, Kunsthall, Vienna, Transmediale, Berlin, Museum of New
and Old Art, Hobart, Tasmanian Museum of Art, amd Ghetto Bienalle, Port
au Prince, among other venues. Nancy is represented by Bett Gallery and
is the founder of Despina’s Media Coven, a holistic computing aesthetics
atelier.

**Kate McLean** is Programme Director for Graphic Design at University
of Kent (Canterbury Campus, UK). Her practice-based research sits at the
intersection of human-perceived smellscapes, cartography, and the
communication of ‘eye-invisible’ sensed data. She leads international
public smellwalks and translates olfactory datasets into visual
smellscape mappings and smellmaps. Her work has been widely exhibited
including at the Smithsonian Cooper Hewitt Design Museum, Catalyst
Science Discovery Centre, Edinburgh Science Festival, and NYC Department
of Transportation Summer Streets, and is held in national collections in
the UK, USA, and Switzerland. She has published papers in Leonardo and
Communication Design and her smellmap designs featured as cover art for
Leonardo and Routledge publications. She is co-editor of *Designing with
Smell: Practices, Challenges, Techniques* (2018).

**Grace McQuilten** is an art historian, curator and writer, and
Associate Professor in the School of Art at RMIT University, Melbourne.
She has worked extensively in social enterprise and community
development alongside her academic career. Grace is the author of *Art
in Consumer Culture: Mis-design* (2011), co-author (with Anthony White)
of *Art as Enterprise: Social & Economic Engagement in Contemporary Art*
(2016) and co-author (with Amy Spiers, Kim Humphery & Peter Kelly) of
*Art/Work: Social Enterprise, Young Creatives and the Forces of
Marginalisation* (2022).

**Lekshmy Parameswaran** is an international award-winning designer,
care activist, and co-founder of The Care Lab, an international network
of activists willing to transform care through human-centred design
practices in the health, social, and education domains. She has been
working in the area of health and care for over two decades. Before
founding The Care Lab, she co-founded fuelfor, a specialist design
consultancy working with a wide variety of players and teams within the
health and care sectors in different countries such as Singapore,
Netherlands, USA, India, and Spain. Previously, she was Innovation
Director, Global Healthcare Team, at Philips Design. She holds a Master
of Engineering degree from Cambridge University and a Master of Arts
from the Royal College of Art in London. Her recent publications include
*Social Design – Principles & Practices to Foster Caring Urban
Communities* (2022), and *Care Up-Close and Digital: A Designers’
Outlook on the Pandemic in Barcelona* (2021).

**Jessamy Perriam** is Assistant Professor in the Technologies in
Practice research group and the Centre for Digital Welfare at the IT
University of Copenhagen. Her research is situated within science and
technology studies and sociology, and focuses on public sector digital
transformation, failure, and public demonstrations of expertise. In 2018
she received her PhD in Sociology with a thesis titled *Theatres of
Failure: Digital Demonstrations of Disruption in Everyday Life*.

**Iris van der Tuin** is Professor of Theory of Cultural Inquiry in the
Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies at Utrecht University,
where she is also university-wide Dean for Interdisciplinary Education.
Iris is interested in humanities scholarship that traverses the ‘two
cultures’ and reaches beyond the boundaries of academia. As such, she
contributes to the new and interdisciplinary humanities and to
practice-based research of interdisciplinary higher education.

**Julienne van Loon** is an Associate Professor with the Writing and
Publishing program at RMIT University and an Honorary Fellow in Writing
at the University of Iowa. Her most recent book is the essay collection,
*The Thinking Woman* (2019). She won the Australian/ Vogel’s Award for
her debut novel *Road Story*. Later fiction works include *Beneath the
Bloodwood Tree* (2008), *Harmless* (2013) and the *Griffith Review*
Novella Award winning ‘Instructions for a Steep Decline’ (2019).
Julienne is scholarly co-editor at *TEXT: Journal of Writing & Writing
Programs* and the co-director of the non/fictionLab.

**Nanna Verhoeff** is Professor of Screen Cultures & Society in the
Department of Media and Culture Studies at Utrecht University. Her
research on urban screens, media architecture, and media art combines
perspectives from (digital) media and performance studies and
contributes to the interdisciplinary methodological development of the
creative humanities.

**Syrus Marcus Ware** is a Vanier Scholar, visual artist, activist,
curator, and educator. Using painting, installation, and performance,
Syrus works with and explores social justice frameworks and Black
activist culture. His work has been shown widely, including solo shows
at Grunt Gallery in 2018 (*2068:Touch Change*) and Wil Aballe Art
Projects in 2021 (*Irresistible Revolutions*). His work has been
featured as part of the Toronto Biennial of Art in 2019 in conjunction
with the Ryerson Image Centre (*Antarctica and Ancestors, Do You Read
Us? (Dispatches from the Future*) and in 2022 (*MBL Freedom*), as well
as for the Bentway’s Safety in Public Spaces Initiative in 2020
(*Radical Love*).

**Clancy Wilmott** is Assistant Professor in the Berkeley Centre for New
Media and the Department of Geography at the University of California,
Berkeley. She was previously Lecturer in Human Geography at the
University of Manchester, Vice-Chancellor’s Postdoctoral Research Fellow
at RMIT University, and a Postdoctoral Researcher on European Research
Council project Charting the Digital based at the Centre for
Interdisciplinary Methodologies of the University of Warwick. Her
research focuses on the relationship between digital technologies and
spatial representation across cartography and new media. She researches
critical cartography, new media, and spatial practices. She is the
author of *Mobile Mapping: Space, Cartography, and the Digital*
published in 2020 by Amsterdam University Press. She has also published
papers in the *Annals of the Association of American Geographers*, *Big
Data and Society*, the *Leonardo Electronic Almanac,* and the *Journal
of Television & New Media*, amongst others.
